9
i stop trying to sleep after my first few attempts are
interrupted by unspeakable nightmares. after that, i just lie
still and do fake breathing whenever someone checks on
me. in the morning, i'm released from the hospital and
instructed to take it easy. cressida asks me to record a
few lines for a new mockingjay propo. at lunch, i keep
waiting for people to bring up peeta's appearance, but no
one does. someone must have seen it besides finnick
and me.
i have training, but gale's scheduled to work with
beetee on weapons or something, so i get permission to
take finnick to the woods. we wander around awhile and
then ditch our communicators under a bush. when we're a
safe distance away, we sit and discuss peeta's broadcast.
"i haven't heard one word about it. no one's told you
anything? finnick says. i shake my head. he pauses"
before he asks, "not even gale?" i'm clinging to a shred of
hope that gale honestly knows nothing about peeta's
message. but i have a bad feeling he does. "maybe he's
trying to find a time to tell you privately."
maybe, i say.
we stay silent so long that a buck wanders into range. i
take it down with an arrow. finnick hauls it back to the
fence.
for dinner, there's minced venison in the stew. gale
walks me back to compartment e after we eat. when i ask
him what's been going on, again there's no mention of
peeta. as soon as my mother and sister are asleep, i slip
the pearl from the drawer and spend a second sleepless
night clutching it in my hand, replaying peeta's words in my
head. "ask yourself, do you really trust the people you're
working with? do you really know what's going on? and if
you don't...find out." find out. what? from who? and how
can peeta know anything except what the capitol tells him?
it's just a capitol propo. more noise. but if plutarch thinks
it's just the capitol line, why didn't he tell me about it? why
hasn't anyone let me or finnick know?
under this debate lies the real source of my distress:
peeta. what have they done to him? and what are they
doing to him right now? clearly, snow did not buy the story
that peeta and i knew nothing about the rebellion. and his
suspicions have been reinforced, now that i have come out
as the mockingjay. peeta can only guess about the rebel
tactics or make up things to tell his torturers. lies, once
discovered, would be severely punished. how abandoned
by me he must feel. in his first interview, he tried to protect
me from the capitol and rebels alike, and not only have i
failed to protect him, i've brought down more horrors upon
him.
come morning, i stick my forearm in the wall and stare
groggily at the day's schedule. immediately after breakfast,
i am slated for production. in the dining hall, as i down my
hot grain and milk and mushy beets, i spot a communicuff
on gale's wrist. "when did you get that back, soldier
hawthorne?" i ask.
"yesterday. they thought if i'm going to be in the field
with you, it could be a backup system of communication,"
says gale.
no one has ever offered me a communicuff. i wonder,
if i asked for one, would i get it? "well, i guess one of us
has to be accessible," i say with an edge to my voice.
what's that mean? he says.
nothing. just repeating what you said, i tell him. "and
i totally agree that the accessible one should be you. i just
hope i still have access to you as well."
our eyes lock, and i realize how furious i am with gale.
that i don't believe for a second that he didn't see peeta's
propo. that i feel completely betrayed that he didn't tell me
about it. we know each other too well for him not to read
my mood and guess what has caused it.
katniss-- he begins. already the admission of guilt is
in his tone.
i grab my tray, cross to the deposit area, and slam the
dishes onto the rack. by the time i'm in the hallway, he's
caught up with me.
why didn't you say something? he asks, taking my
arm.
why didn't i? i jerk my arm free. "why didn't you,
gale? and i did, by the way, when i asked you last night
about what had been going on!"
"i'm sorry. all right? i didn't know what to do. i wanted to
tell you, but everyone was afraid that seeing peeta's propo
would make you sick, he says."
"they were right. it did. but not quite as sick as you
lying to me for coin. at that moment, his communicuff"
starts beeping. "there she is. better run. you have things to
tell her."
for a moment, real hurt registers on his face. then
cold anger replaces it. he turns on his heel and goes.
maybe i have been too spiteful, not given him enough time
to explain. maybe everyone is just trying to protect me by
lying to me. i don't care. i'm sick of people lying to me for
my own good. because really it's mostly for their own good.
lie to katniss about the rebellion so she doesn't do
anything crazy. send her into the arena without a clue so we
can fish her out. don't tell her about peeta's propo because
it might make her sick, and it's hard enough to get a decent
performance out of her as it is.
i do feel sick. heartsick. and too tired for a day of
production. but i'm already at remake, so i go in. today, i
discover, we will be returning to district 12. cressida wants
to do unscripted interviews with gale and me throwing light
on our demolished city.
if you're both up for that, says cressida, looking
closely at my face.
count me in, i say. i stand, uncommunicative and
stiff, a mannequin, as my prep team dresses me, does my
hair, and dabs makeup on my face. not enough to show,
only enough to take the edge off the circles under my
sleepless eyes.
boggs escorts me down to the hangar, but we don't
talk beyond a preliminary greeting. i'm grateful to be spared
another exchange about my disobedience in 8, especially
since his mask looks so uncomfortable.
at the last moment, i remember to send a message to
my mother about my leaving 13, and stress that it won't be
dangerous. we board a hovercraft for the short ride to 12
and i'm directed to a seat at a table where plutarch, gale,
and cressida are poring over a map. plutarch's brimming
with satisfaction as he shows me the before/after effects of
the first couple of propos. the rebels, who were barely
maintaining a foothold in several districts, have rallied. they
have actually taken 3 and 11--the latter so crucial since it's
panem's main food supplier--and have made inroads in
several other districts as well.
hopeful. very hopeful indeed, says plutarch.
"fulvia's going to have the first round of we remember
spots ready tonight, so we can target the individual districts
with their dead. finnick's absolutely marvelous."
it's painful to watch, actually, says cressida. "he
knew so many of them personally."
that's what makes it so effective, says plutarch.
"straight from the heart. you're all doing beautifully. coin
could not be more pleased."
gale didn't tell them, then. about my pretending not to
see peeta and my anger at their cover-up. but i guess it's
too little, too late, because i still can't let it go. it doesn't
matter. he's not speaking to me, either.
it's not until we land in the meadow that i realize
haymitch isn't among our company. when i ask plutarch
about his absence, he just shakes his head and says, "he
couldn't face it."
"haymitch? not able to face something? wanted a
day off, more likely, i say."
"i think his actual words were 'i couldn't face it without a
bottle,' says plutarch."
i roll my eyes, long out of patience with my mentor, his
weakness for drink, and what he can or can't confront. but
about five minutes after my return to 12, i'm wishing i had a
bottle myself. i thought i'd come to terms with 12's demise--
heard of it, seen it from the air, and wandered through its
ashes. so why does everything bring on a fresh pang of
grief? was i simply too out of it before to fully register the
loss of my world? or is it the look on gale's face as he
takes in the destruction on foot that makes the atrocity feel
brand-new?
cressida directs the team to start with me at my old
house. i ask her what she wants me to do. "whatever you
feel like," she says. standing back in my kitchen, i don't feel
like doing anything. in fact, i find myself focusing up at the
sky--the only roof left--because too many memories are
drowning me. after a while, cressida says, "that's fine,
katniss. let's move on."
gale doesn't get off so easily at his old address.
cressida films him in silence for a few minutes, but just as
he pulls the one remnant of his previous life from the ashes-
#NAME?
family, his job, life in the seam. she makes him go back to
the night of the firebombing and reenact it, starting at his
house, working his way down across the meadow and
through the woods to the lake. i straggle behind the film
crew and the bodyguards, feeling their presence to be a
violation of my beloved woods. this is a private place, a
sanctuary, already corrupted by the capitol's evil. even
after we've left behind the charred stumps near the fence,
we're still tripping over decomposing bodies. do we have
to record it for everyone to see?
by the time we reach the lake, gale seems to have lost
his ability to speak. everyone's dripping in sweat--
especially castor and pollux in their insect shells--and
cressida calls for a break. i scoop up handfuls of water
from the lake, wishing i could dive in and surface alone and
naked and unobserved. i wander around the perimeter for a
while. when i come back around to the little concrete house
beside the lake, i pause in the doorway and see gale
propping the crooked poker he salvaged against the wall
by the hearth. for a moment i have an image of a lone
stranger, sometime far in the future, wandering lost in the
wilderness and coming upon this small place of refuge, with
the pile of split logs, the hearth, the poker. wondering how
it came to be. gale turns and meets my eyes and i know
he's thinking about our last meeting here. when we fought
over whether or not to run away. if we had, would district 12
still be there? i think it would. but the capitol would still be
in control of panem as well.
cheese sandwiches are passed around and we eat
them in the shade of the trees. i intentionally sit at the far
edge of the group, next to pollux, so i don't have to talk. no
one's talking much, really. in the relative quiet, the birds
take back the woods. i nudge pollux with my elbow and
point out a small black bird with a crown. it hops to a new
branch, momentarily opening its wings, showing off its
white patches. pollux gestures to my pin and raises his
eyebrows questioningly. i nod, confirming it's a mockingjay.
i hold up one finger to say wait, i'll show you, and whistle a
birdcall. the mockingjay cocks its head and whistles the
call right back at me. then, to my surprise, pollux whistles a
few notes of his own. the bird answers him immediately.
pollux's face breaks into an expression of delight and he
has a series of melodic exchanges with the mockingjay. my
guess is it's the first conversation he's had in years. music
draws mockingjays like blossoms do bees, and in a short
while he's got half a dozen of them perched in the branches
over our heads. he taps me on the arm and uses a twig to
write a word in the dirt. sing?
usually, i'd decline, but it's kind of impossible to say no
to pollux, given the circumstances. besides, the
mockingjays' song voices are different from their whistles,
and i'd like him to hear them. so, before i actually think
about what i'm doing, i sing rue's four notes, the ones she
used to signal the end of the workday in 11. the notes that
ended up as the background music to her murder. the
birds don't know that. they pick up the simple phrase and
bounce it back and forth between them in sweet harmony.
just as they did in the hunger games before the muttations
broke through the trees, chased us onto the cornucopia,
and slowly gnawed cato to a bloody pulp--
want to hear them do a real song? i burst out.
anything to stop those memories. i'm on my feet, moving
back into the trees, resting my hand on the rough trunk of a
maple where the birds perch. i have not sung "the hanging
tree" out loud for ten years, because it's forbidden, but i
remember every word. i begin softly, sweetly, as my father
did.
"are you, are you
coming to the tree
where they strung up a man they say
murdered three.
strange things did happen here
no stranger would it be
if we met up at midnight in the hanging tree."
the mockingjays begin to alter their songs as they
become aware of my new offering.
"are you, are you
coming to the tree
where the dead man called out for his love
to flee.
strange things did happen here
no stranger would it be
if we met up at midnight in the hanging tree."
i have the birds' attention now. in one more verse,
surely they will have captured the melody, as it's simple and
repeats four times with little variation.
"are you, are you
coming to the tree
where i told you to run, so we'd both be free.
strange things did happen here
no stranger would it be
if we met up at midnight in the hanging tree."
a hush in the trees. just the rustle of leaves in the
breeze. but no birds, mockingjay or other. peeta's right.
they do fall silent when i sing. just as they did for my father.
"are you, are you
coming to the tree
wear a necklace of rope, side by side with
me.
strange things did happen here
no stranger would it be
if we met up at midnight in the hanging tree."
the birds are waiting for me to continue. but that's it.
last verse. in the stillness i remember the scene. i was
home from a day in the woods with my father. sitting on the
floor with prim, who was just a toddler, singing "the
hanging tree." making us necklaces out of scraps of old
rope like it said in the song, not knowing the real meaning
of the words. the tune was simple and easy to harmonize
to, though, and back then i could memorize almost anything
set to music after a round or two. suddenly, my mother
snatched the rope necklaces away and was yelling at my
father. i started to cry because my mother never yelled, and
then prim was wailing and i ran outside to hide. as i had
exactly one hiding spot--in the meadow under a
honeysuckle bush--my father found me immediately. he
calmed me down and told me everything was fine, only
we'd better not sing that song anymore. my mother just
wanted me to forget it. so, of course, every word was
immediately, irrevocably branded into my brain.
we didn't sing it anymore, my father and i, or even
speak of it. after he died, it used to come back to me a lot.
being older, i began to understand the lyrics. at the
beginning, it sounds like a guy is trying to get his girlfriend
to secretly meet up with him at midnight. but it's an odd
place for a tryst, a hanging tree, where a man was hung for
murder. the murderer's lover must have had something to
do with the killing, or maybe they were just going to punish
her anyway, because his corpse called out for her to flee.
that's weird obviously, the talking-corpse bit, but it's not
until the third verse that "the hanging tree" begins to get
unnerving. you realize the singer of the song is the dead
murderer. he's still in the hanging tree. and even though he
told his lover to flee, he keeps asking if she's coming to
meet him. the phrase where i told you to run, so we'd both
be free is the most troubling because at first you think he's
talking about when he told her to flee, presumably to safety.
but then you wonder if he meant for her to run to him. to
death. in the final stanza, it's clear that that's what he's
waiting for. his lover, with her rope necklace, hanging dead
next to him in the tree.
i used to think the murderer was the creepiest guy
imaginable. now, with a couple of trips to the hunger
games under my belt, i decide not to judge him without
knowing more details. maybe his lover was already
sentenced to death and he was trying to make it easier. to
let her know he'd be waiting. or maybe he thought the place
he was leaving her was really worse than death. didn't i
want to kill peeta with that syringe to save him from the
capitol? was that really my only option? probably not, but i
couldn't think of another at the time.
i guess my mother thought the whole thing was too
twisted for a seven-year-old, though. especially one who
made her own rope necklaces. it wasn't like hanging was
something that only happened in a story. plenty of people
were executed that way in 12. you can bet she didn't want
me singing it in front of my music class. she probably
wouldn't like me doing it here for pollux even, but at least
i'm not--wait, no, i'm wrong. as i glance sideways, i see
castor has been taping me. everyone is watching me
intently. and pollux has tears running down his cheeks
because no doubt my freaky song has dredged up some
terrible incident in his life. great. i sigh and lean back
against the trunk. that's when the mockingjays begin their
rendition of "the hanging tree." in their mouths, it's quite
beautiful. conscious of being filmed, i stand quietly until i
hear cressida call, "cut!"
plutarch crosses to me, laughing. "where do you
come up with this stuff? no one would believe it if we made
it up!" he throws an arm around me and kisses me on the
top of my head with a loud smack. "you're golden!"
i wasn't doing it for the cameras, i say.
lucky they were on, then, he says. "come on,
everybody, back to town!"
as we trudge back through the woods, we reach a
boulder, and both gale and i turn our heads in the same
direction, like a pair of dogs catching a scent on the wind.
cressida notices and asks what lies that way. we admit,
without acknowledging each other, it's our old hunting
rendezvous place. she wants to see it, even after we tell
her it's nothing really.
nothing but a place where i was happy, i think.
our rock ledge overlooking the valley. perhaps a little
less green than usual, but the blackberry bushes hang
heavy with fruit. here began countless days of hunting and
snaring, fishing and gathering, roaming together through
the woods, unloading our thoughts while we filled our game
bags. this was the doorway to both sustenance and sanity.
and we were each other's key.
there's no district 12 to escape from now, no
peacekeepers to trick, no hungry mouths to feed. the
capitol took away all of that, and i'm on the verge of losing
gale as well. the glue of mutual need that bonded us so
tightly together for all those years is melting away. dark
patches, not light, show in the spaces between us. how can
it be that today, in the face of 12's horrible demise, we are
too angry to even speak to each other?
gale as good as lied to me. that was unacceptable,
even if he was concerned about my well-being. his apology
seemed genuine, though. and i threw it back in his face
with an insult to make sure it stung. what is happening to
us? why are we always at odds now? it's all a muddle, but i
somehow feel that if i went back to the root of our troubles,
my actions would be at the heart of it. do i really want to
drive him away?
my fingers encircle a blackberry and pluck it from its
stem. i roll it gently between my thumb and forefinger.
suddenly, i turn to him and toss it in his direction. "and may
the odds--" i say. i throw it high so he has plenty of time to
decide whether to knock it aside or accept it.
gale's eyes train on me, not the berry, but at the last
moment, he opens his mouth and catches it. he chews,
swallows, and there's a long pause before he says "--be
ever in your favor." but he does say it.
cressida has us sit in the nook in the rocks, where it's
impossible not to be touching, and coaxes us into talking
about hunting. what drove us out into the woods, how we
met, favorite moments. we thaw, begin to laugh a little, as
we relate mishaps with bees and wild dogs and skunks.
when the conversation turns to how it felt to translate our
skill with weapons to the bombing in 8, i stop talking. gale
just says, "long overdue."
by the time we reach the town square, afternoon's
sinking into evening. i take cressida to the rubble of the
bakery and ask her to film something. the only emotion i
can muster is exhaustion. "peeta, this is your home. none
of your family has been heard of since the bombing. twelve
is gone. and you're calling for a cease-fire?" i look across
the emptiness. "there's no one left to hear you."
as we stand before the lump of metal that was the
gallows, cressida asks if either of us has ever been
tortured. in answer, gale pulls off his shirt and turns his
back to the camera. i stare at the lash marks, and again
hear the whistling of the whip, see his bloody figure hanging
unconscious by his wrists.
i'm done, i announce. "i'll meet you at the victor's
village. something for...my mother."
i guess i walked here, but the next thing i'm conscious
of is sitting on the floor in front of the kitchen cabinets of our
house in the victor's village. meticulously lining ceramic
jars and glass bottles into a box. placing clean cotton
bandages between them to prevent breaking. wrapping
bunches of dried flowers.
suddenly, i remember the rose on my dresser. was it
real? if so, is it still up there? i have to resist the temptation
to check. if it's there, it will only frighten me all over again. i
hurry with my packing.
when the cabinets are empty, i rise to find that gale
has materialized in my kitchen. it's disturbing how
soundlessly he can appear. he's leaning on the table, his
fingers spread wide against the wood grain. i set the box
between us. "remember?" he asks. "this is where you
kissed me."
so the heavy dose of morphling administered after the
whipping wasn't enough to erase that from his
consciousness. "i didn't think you'd remember that," i say.
have to be dead to forget. maybe even not then, he
tells me. "maybe i'll be like that man in 'the hanging tree.'
still waiting for an answer." gale, who i have never seen
cry, has tears in his eyes. to keep them from spilling over, i
reach forward and press my lips against his. we taste of
heat, ashes, and misery. it's a surprising flavor for such a
gentle kiss. he pulls away first and gives me a wry smile. "i
knew you'd kiss me."
how? i say. because i didn't know myself.
because i'm in pain, he says. "that's the only way i
get your attention." he picks up the box. "don't worry,
katniss. it'll pass." he leaves before i can answer.
i'm too weary to work through his latest charge. i spend
the short ride back to 13 curled up in a seat, trying to ignore
plutarch going on about one of his favorite subjects--
weapons mankind no longer has at its disposal. high-flying
planes, military satellites, cell disintegrators, drones,
biological weapons with expiration dates. brought down by
the destruction of the atmosphere or lack of resources or
moral squeamishness. you can hear the regret of a head
gamemaker who can only dream of such toys, who must
make do with hovercraft and land-to-land missiles and plain
old guns.
after dropping off my mockingjay suit, i go straight to
bed without eating. even so, prim has to shake me to get
me up in the morning. after breakfast, i ignore my schedule
and take a nap in the supply closet. when i come to,
crawling out from between the boxes of chalk and pencils,
it's dinnertime again. i get an extra-large portion of pea
soup and am headed back to compartment e when boggs
intercepts me.
"there's a meeting in command. disregard your
current schedule, he says."
done, i say.
did you follow it at all today? he asks in
exasperation.
who knows? i'm mentally disoriented. i hold up my
wrist to show my medical bracelet and realize it's gone.
"see? i can't even remember they took my bracelet. why
do they want me in command? did i miss something?"
"i think cressida wanted to show you the twelve
propos. but i guess you'll see them when they air, he says."
"that's what i need a schedule of. when the propos
air, i say. he shoots me a look but doesn't comment"
further.
people have crowded into command, but they've
saved me a seat between finnick and plutarch. the
screens are already up on the table, showing the regular
capitol feed.
"what's going on? aren't we seeing the twelve
propos? i ask."
oh, no, says plutarch. "i mean, possibly. i don't know
exactly what footage beetee plans to use."
"beetee thinks he's found a way to break into the feed
nationwide, says finnick. ""so that our propos will air in the"
capitol, too. he's down working on it in special defense
now. there's live programming tonight. snow's making an
appearance or something. i think it's starting."
the capitol seal appears, underscored by the anthem.
then i'm staring directly into president snow's snake eyes
as he greets the nation. he seems barricaded behind his
podium, but the white rose in his lapel is in full view. the
camera pulls back to include peeta, off to one side in front
of a projected map of panem. he's sitting in an elevated
chair, his shoes supported by a metal rung. the foot of his
prosthetic leg taps out a strange irregular beat. beads of
sweat have broken through the layer of powder on his
upper lip and forehead. but it's the look in his eyes--angry
yet unfocused--that frightens me the most.
he's worse, i whisper. finnick grasps my hand, to
give me an anchor, and i try to hang on.
peeta begins to speak in a frustrated tone about the
need for the cease-fire. he highlights the damage done to
key infrastructure in various districts, and as he speaks,
parts of the map light up, showing images of the
destruction. a broken dam in 7. a derailed train with a pool
of toxic waste spilling from the tank cars. a granary
collapsing after a fire. all of these he attributes to rebel
action.
bam! without warning, i'm suddenly on television,
standing in the rubble of the bakery.
plutarch jumps to his feet. "he did it! beetee broke in!"
the room's buzzing with reaction when peeta's back,
distracted. he has seen me on the monitor. he tries to pick
up his speech by moving on to the bombing of a water
purification plant, when a clip of finnick talking about rue
replaces him. and then the whole thing breaks down into a
broadcast battle, as the capitol tech masters try to fend off
beetee's attack. but they are unprepared, and beetee,
apparently anticipating he would not hold on to control, has
an arsenal of five- to ten-second clips to work with. we
watch the official presentation deteriorate as it's peppered
with choice shots from the propos.
plutarch's in spasms of delight and most everybody is
cheering beetee on, but finnick remains still and
speechless beside me. i meet haymitch's eyes from
across the room and see my own dread mirrored back. the
recognition that with every cheer, peeta slips even farther
from our grasp.
the capitol seal's back up, accompanied by a flat
audio tone. this lasts about twenty seconds before snow
and peeta return. the set is in turmoil. we're hearing frantic
exchanges from their booth. snow plows forward, saying
that clearly the rebels are now attempting to disrupt the
dissemination of information they find incriminating, but
both truth and justice will reign. the full broadcast will
resume when security has been reinstated. he asks peeta
if, given tonight's demonstration, he has any parting
thoughts for katniss everdeen.
at the mention of my name, peeta's face contorts in
effort. "katniss...how do you think this will end? what will be
left? no one is safe. not in the capitol. not in the districts.
and you...in thirteen..." he inhales sharply, as if fighting for
air; his eyes look insane. "dead by morning!"
off camera, snow orders, "end it!" beetee throws the
whole thing into chaos by flashing a still shot of me standing
in front of the hospital at three-second intervals. but
between the images, we are privy to the real-life action
being played out on the set. peeta's attempt to continue
speaking. the camera knocked down to record the white
tiled floor. the scuffle of boots. the impact of the blow that's
inseparable from peeta's cry of pain.
and his blood as it splatters the tiles.
part ii
the assault
10
the scream begins in my lower back and works its
way up through my body only to jam in my throat. i am avox
mute, choking on my grief. even if i could release the
muscles in my neck, let the sound tear into space, would
anyone notice it? the room's in an uproar. questions and
demands ring out as they try to decipher peeta's words.
and you...in thirteen...dead by morning! yet no one is
asking about the messenger whose blood has been
replaced by static.
a voice calls the others to attention. "shut up!" every
pair of eyes falls on haymitch. "it's not some big mystery!
the boy's telling us we're about to be attacked. here. in
thirteen."
how would he have that information?
why should we trust him?
how do you know?
haymitch gives a growl of frustration. "they're beating
him bloody while we speak. what more do you need?
katniss, help me out here!"
i have to give myself a shake to free my words.
"haymitch's right. i don't know where peeta got the
information. or if it's true. but he believes it is. and they're--
 i can't say aloud what snow's doing to him."
you don't know him, haymitch says to coin. "we do.
get your people ready."
the president doesn't seem alarmed, only somewhat
perplexed, by this turn in events. she mulls over the words,
tapping one finger lightly on the rim of the control board in
front of her. when she speaks, she addresses haymitch in
an even voice. "of course, we have prepared for such a
scenario. although we have decades of support for the
assumption that further direct attacks on thirteen would be
counterproductive to the capitol's cause. nuclear missiles
would release radiation into the atmosphere, with
incalculable environmental results. even routine bombing
could badly damage our military compound, which we know
they hope to regain. and, of course, they invite a
counterstrike. it is conceivable that, given our current
alliance with the rebels, those would be viewed as
acceptable risks."
you think so? says haymitch. it's a shade too
sincere, but the subtleties of irony are often wasted in 13.
"i do. at any rate, we're overdue for a level five
security drill, says coin. ""let's proceed with the lockdown."""
she begins to type rapidly on her keyboard, authorizing her
decision. the moment she raises her head, it begins.
there have been two low-level drills since i arrived in
13. i don't remember much about the first. i was in intensive
care in the hospital and i think the patients were exempted,
as the complications of removing us for a practice drill
outweighed the benefits. i was vaguely aware of a
mechanical voice instructing people to congregate in yellow
zones. during the second, a level two drill meant for minor
crises--such as a temporary quarantine while citizens were
tested for contagion during a flu outbreak--we were
supposed to return to our living quarters. i stayed behind a
pipe in the laundry room, ignored the pulsating beeps
coming over the audio system, and watched a spider
construct a web. neither experience has prepared me for
the wordless, eardrum-piercing, fear-inducing sirens that
now permeate 13. there would be no disregarding this
sound, which seems designed to throw the whole
population into a frenzy. but this is 13 and that doesn't
happen.
boggs guides finnick and me out of command, along
the hall to a doorway, and onto a wide stairway. streams of
people are converging to form a river that flows only
downward. no one shrieks or tries to push ahead. even the
children don't resist. we descend, flight after flight,
speechless, because no word could be heard above this
sound. i look for my mother and prim, but it's impossible to
see anyone but those immediately around me. they're both
working in the hospital tonight, though, so there's no way
they can miss the drill.
my ears pop and my eyes feel heavy. we are coalmine
deep. the only plus is that the farther we retreat into
the earth, the less shrill the sirens become. it's as if they
were meant to physically drive us away from the surface,
which i suppose they are. groups of people begin to peel
off into marked doorways and still boggs directs me
downward, until finally the stairs end at the edge of an
enormous cavern. i start to walk straight in and boggs
stops me, shows me that i must wave my schedule in front
of a scanner so that i'm accounted for. no doubt the
information's going to some computer somewhere to make
sure no one's gone astray.
the place seems unable to decide if it's natural or
man-made. certain areas of the walls are stone, while steel
beams and concrete heavily reinforce others. sleeping
bunks are hewn right into the rock walls. there's a kitchen,
bathrooms, a first-aid station. this place was designed for
an extended stay.
white signs with letters or numbers are placed at
intervals around the cavern. as boggs tells finnick and me
to report to the area that matches our assigned quarters--in
my case e for compartment e--plutarch strolls up. "ah,
here you are," he says. recent events have had little effect
on plutarch's mood. he still has a happy glow from
beetee's success on the airtime assault. eyes on the
forest, not on the trees. not on peeta's punishment or 13's
imminent blasting. "katniss, obviously this is a bad moment
for you, what with peeta's setback, but you need to be
aware that others will be watching you."
what? i say. i can't believe he actually just
downgraded peeta's dire circumstances to a setback.
"the other people in the bunker, they'll be taking their
cue on how to react from you. if you're calm and brave,
others will try to be as well. if you panic, it could spread like
wildfire, explains plutarch. i just stare at him. ""fire is"
catching, so to speak," he continues, as if i'm being slow on
the uptake.
why don't i just pretend i'm on camera, plutarch? i
say.
"yes! perfect. one is always much braver with an
audience, he says. ""look at the courage peeta just"
displayed!"
it's all i can do not to slap him.
"i've got to get back to coin before lockdown. you
keep up the good work! he says, and then heads off."
i cross to the big letter e posted on the wall. our space
consists of a twelve-by-twelve-foot square of stone floor
delineated by painted lines. carved into the wall are two
bunks--one of us will be sleeping on the floor--and a
ground-level cube space for storage. a piece of white
paper, coated in clear plastic, reads bunker protocol. i
stare fixedly at the little black specks on the sheet. for a
while, they're obscured by the residual blood droplets that i
can't seem to wipe from my vision. slowly, the words come
into focus. the first section is entitled "on arrival."
1. make sure all members of your compartment are
accounted for.
my mother and prim haven't arrived, but i was one of
the first people to reach the bunker. both of them are
probably helping to relocate hospital patients.
2. go to the supply station and secure one pack for
each member of your compartment. ready your
living area. return pack(s).
i scan the cavern until i locate the supply station, a
deep room set off by a counter. people wait behind it, but
there's not a lot of activity there yet. i walk over, give our
compartment letter, and request three packs. a man
checks a sheet, pulls the specified packs from shelving,
and swings them up onto the counter. after sliding one on
my back and getting a grip on the other two with my hands, i
turn to find a group rapidly forming behind me. "excuse
me," i say as i carry my supplies through the others. is it a
matter of timing? or is plutarch right? are these people
modeling their behavior on mine?
back at our space, i open one of the packs to find a
thin mattress, bedding, two sets of gray clothing, a
toothbrush, a comb, and a flashlight. on examining the
contents of the other packs, i find the only discernible
difference is that they contain both gray and white outfits.
the latter will be for my mother and prim, in case they have
medical duties. after i make up the beds, store the clothes,
and return the backpacks, i've got nothing to do but observe
the last rule.
3. await further instructions.
i sit cross-legged on the floor to await. a steady flow of
people begins to fill the room, claiming spaces, collecting
supplies. it won't take long until the place is full up. i wonder
if my mother and prim are going to stay the night at
wherever the hospital patients have been taken. but, no, i
don't think so. they were on the list here. i'm starting to get
anxious, when my mother appears. i look behind her into a
sea of strangers. "where's prim?" i ask.
isn't she here? she replies. "she was supposed to
come straight down from the hospital. she left ten minutes
before i did. where is she? where could she have gone?"
i squeeze my lids shut tight for a moment, to track her
as i would prey on a hunt. see her react to the sirens, rush
to help the patients, nod as they gesture for her to descend
to the bunker, and then hesitate with her on the stairs. torn
for a moment. but why?
my eyes fly open. "the cat! she went back for him!"
oh, no, my mother says. we both know i'm right.
we're pushing against the incoming tide, trying to get out of
the bunker. up ahead, i can see them preparing to shut the
thick metal doors. slowly rotating the metal wheels on
either side inward. somehow i know that once they have
been sealed, nothing in the world will convince the soldiers
to open them. perhaps it will even be beyond their control.
i'm indiscriminately shoving people aside as i shout for
them to wait. the space between the doors shrinks to a
yard, a foot; there are only a few inches left when i jam my
hand through the crack.
open it! let me out! i cry.
consternation shows on the soldiers' faces as they
reverse the wheels a bit. not enough to let me pass, but
enough to avoid crushing my fingers. i take the opportunity
to wedge my shoulder into the opening. "prim!" i holler up
the stairs. my mother pleads with the guards as i try to
wriggle my way out. "prim!"
then i hear it. the faint sound of footsteps on the
stairs. "we're coming!" i hear my sister call.
hold the door! that was gale.
they're coming! i tell the guards, and they slide the
doors open about a foot. but i don't dare move--afraid
they'll lock us all out--until prim appears, her cheeks flushed
with running, hauling buttercup. i pull her inside and gale
follows, twisting an armload of baggage sideways to get it
into the bunker. the doors are closed with a loud and final
clank.
what were you thinking? i give prim an angry shake
and then hug her, squashing buttercup between us.
prim's explanation is already on her lips. "i couldn't
leave him behind, katniss. not twice. you should have seen
him pacing the room and howling. he'd come back to
protect us."
okay. okay. i take a few breaths to calm myself, step
back, and lift buttercup by the scruff of the neck. "i should've
drowned you when i had the chance." his ears flatten and
he raises a paw. i hiss before he gets a chance, which
seems to annoy him a little, since he considers hissing his
own personal sound of contempt. in retaliation, he gives a
helpless kitten mew that brings my sister immediately to his
defense.
oh, katniss, don't tease him, she says, folding him
back in her arms. "he's already so upset."
the idea that i've wounded the brute's tiny cat feelings
just invites further taunting. but prim's genuinely distressed
for him. so instead, i visualize buttercup's fur lining a pair of
gloves, an image that has helped me deal with him over the
years. "okay, sorry. we're under the big e on the wall.
better get him settled in before he loses it." prim hurries
off, and i find myself face-to-face with gale. he's holding the
box of medical supplies from our kitchen in 12. site of our
last conversation, kiss, fallout, whatever. my game bag's
slung across his shoulder.
if peeta's right, these didn't stand a chance, he says.
peeta. blood like raindrops on the window. like wet
mud on boots.
thanks for...everything. i take our stuff. "what were
you doing up in our rooms?"
just double-checking, he says. "we're in forty-
seven if you need me."
practically everyone withdrew to their spaces when the
doors shut, so i get to cross to our new home with at least
five hundred people watching me. i try to appear extra calm
to make up for my frantic crashing through the crowd. like
that's fooling anyone. so much for setting an example. oh,
who cares? they all think i'm nuts anyway. one man, who i
think i knocked to the floor, catches my eye and rubs his
elbow resentfully. i almost hiss at him, too.
prim has buttercup installed on the lower bunk, draped
in a blanket so that only his face pokes out. this is how he
likes to be when there's thunder, the one thing that actually
frightens him. my mother puts her box carefully in the cube. i
crouch, my back supported by the wall, to check what gale
managed to rescue in my hunting bag. the plant book, the
hunting jacket, my parents' wedding photo, and the
personal contents of my drawer. my mockingjay pin now
lives with cinna's outfit, but there's the gold locket and the
silver parachute with the spile and peeta's pearl. i knot the
pearl into the corner of the parachute, bury it deep in the
recesses of the bag, as if it's peeta's life and no one can
take it away as long as i guard it.
the faint sound of the sirens cuts off sharply. coin's
voice comes over the district audio system, thanking us all
for an exemplary evacuation of the upper levels. she
stresses that this is not a drill, as peeta mellark, the district
12 victor, has possibly made a televised reference to an
attack on 13 tonight.
that's when the first bomb hits. there's an initial sense
of impact followed by an explosion that resonates in my
innermost parts, the lining of my intestines, the marrow of
my bones, the roots of my teeth. we're all going to die, i
think. my eyes turn upward, expecting to see giant cracks
race across the ceiling, massive chunks of stone raining
down on us, but the bunker itself gives only a slight shudder.
the lights go out and i experience the disorientation of total
darkness. speechless human sounds--spontaneous
shrieks, ragged breaths, baby whimpers, one musical bit of
insane laughter--dance around in the charged air. then
there's a hum of a generator, and a dim wavering glow
replaces the stark lighting that is the norm in 13. it's closer
to what we had in our homes in 12, when the candles and
fire burned low on a winter's night.
i reach for prim in the twilight, clamp my hand on her
leg, and pull myself over to her. her voice remains steady
as she croons to buttercup. "it's all right, baby, it's all right.
we'll be okay down here."
my mother wraps her arms around us. i allow myself to
feel young for a moment and rest my head on her shoulder.
that was nothing like the bombs in eight, i say.
probably a bunker missile, says prim, keeping her
voice soothing for the cat's sake. "we learned about them
during the orientation for new citizens. they're designed to
penetrate deep in the ground before they go off. because
there's no point in bombing thirteen on the surface
anymore."
nuclear? i ask, feeling a chill run through me.
not necessarily, says prim. "some just have a lot of
explosives in them. but...it could be either kind, i guess."
the gloom makes it hard to see the heavy metal doors
at the end of the bunker. would they be any protection
against a nuclear attack? and even if they were one
hundred percent effective at sealing out the radiation, which
is really unlikely, would we ever be able to leave this place?
the thought of spending whatever remains of my life in this
stone vault horrifies me. i want to run madly for the door and
demand to be released into whatever lies above. it's
pointless. they would never let me out, and i might start
some kind of stampede.
we're so far down, i'm sure we're safe, says my
mother wanly. is she thinking of my father's being blown to
nothingness in the mines? "it was a close call, though.
thank goodness peeta had the wherewithal to warn us."
the wherewithal. a general term that somehow
includes everything that was needed for him to sound the
alarm. the knowledge, the opportunity, the courage. and
something else i can't define. peeta seemed to have been
waging a sort of battle in his mind, fighting to get the
message out. why? the ease with which he manipulates
words is his greatest talent. was his difficulty a result of his
torture? something more? like madness?
coin's voice, perhaps a shade grimmer, fills the
bunker, the volume level flickering with the lights.
"apparently, peeta mellark's information was sound and we
owe him a great debt of gratitude. sensors indicate the first
missile was not nuclear, but very powerful. we expect more
will follow. for the duration of the attack, citizens are to stay
in their assigned areas unless otherwise notified."
a soldier alerts my mother that she's needed in the
first-aid station. she's reluctant to leave us, even though
she'll only be thirty yards away.
we'll be fine, really, i tell her. "do you think anything
could get past him?" i point to buttercup, who gives me
such a halfhearted hiss, we all have to laugh a little. even i
feel sorry for him. after my mother goes, i suggest, "why
don't you climb in with him, prim?"
"i know it's silly...but i'm afraid the bunk might collapse
on us during the attack, she says."
if the bunks collapse, the whole bunker will have given
way and buried us, but i decide this kind of logic won't
actually be helpful. instead, i clean out the storage cube and
make buttercup a bed inside. then i pull a mattress in front
of it for my sister and me to share.
we're given clearance in small groups to use the
bathroom and brush our teeth, although showering has
been canceled for the day. i curl up with prim on the
mattress, double layering the blankets because the cavern
emits a dank chill. buttercup, miserable even with prim's
constant attention, huddles in the cube and exhales cat
breath in my face.
despite the disagreeable conditions, i'm glad to have
time with my sister. my extreme preoccupation since i
came here--no, since the first games, really--has left little
attention for her. i haven't been watching over her the way i
should, the way i used to. after all, it was gale who checked
our compartment, not me. something to make up for.
i realize i've never even bothered to ask her about how
she's handling the shock of coming here. "so, how are you
liking thirteen, prim?" i offer.
right now? she asks. we both laugh. "i miss home
badly sometimes. but then i remember there's nothing left
to miss anymore. i feel safer here. we don't have to worry
about you. well, not the same way." she pauses, and then
a shy smile crosses her lips. "i think they're going to train
me to be a doctor."
it's the first i've heard of it. "well, of course, they are.
they'd be stupid not to."
"they've been watching me when i help out in the
hospital. i'm already taking the medic courses. it's just
beginner's stuff. i know a lot of it from home. still, there's
plenty to learn, she tells me."
that's great, i say. prim a doctor. she couldn't even
dream of it in 12. something small and quiet, like a match
being struck, lights up the gloom inside me. this is the sort
of future a rebellion could bring.
what about you, katniss? how are you managing?
her fingertip moves in short, gentle strokes between
buttercup's eyes. "and don't say you're fine."
it's true. whatever the opposite of fine is, that's what i
am. so i go ahead and tell her about peeta, his
deterioration on-screen, and how i think they must be killing
him at this very moment. buttercup has to rely on himself for
a while, because now prim turns her attention to me. pulling
me closer, brushing the hair back behind my ears with her
fingers. i've stopped talking because there's really nothing
left to say and there's this piercing sort of pain where my
heart is. maybe i'm even having a heart attack, but it doesn't
seem worth mentioning.
katniss, i don't think president snow will kill peeta,
she says. of course, she says this; it's what she thinks will
calm me. but her next words come as a surprise. "if he
does, he won't have anyone left you want. he won't have
any way to hurt you."
suddenly, i am reminded of another girl, one who had
seen all the evil the capitol had to offer. johanna mason,
the tribute from district 7, in the last arena. i was trying to
prevent her from going into the jungle where the jabberjays
mimicked the voices of loved ones being tortured, but she
brushed me off, saying, "they can't hurt me. i'm not like
the rest of you. there's no one left i love."
then i know prim is right, that snow cannot afford to
waste peeta's life, especially now, while the mockingjay
causes so much havoc. he's killed cinna already.
destroyed my home. my family, gale, and even haymitch
are out of his reach. peeta's all he has left.
so, what do you think they'll do to him? i ask.
prim sounds about a thousand years old when she
speaks.
whatever it takes to break you.
11
what will break me?
this is the question that consumes me over the next
three days as we wait to be released from our prison of
safety. what will break me into a million pieces so that i am
beyond repair, beyond usefulness? i mention it to no one,
but it devours my waking hours and weaves itself
throughout my nightmares.
four more bunker missiles fall over this period, all
massive, all very damaging, but there's no urgency to the
attack. the bombs are spread out over the long hours so
that just when you think the raid is over, another blast sends
shock waves through your guts. it feels more designed to
keep us in lockdown than to decimate 13. cripple the
district, yes. give the people plenty to do to get the place
running again. but destroy it? no. coin was right on that
point. you don't destroy what you want to acquire in the
future. i assume what they really want, in the short term, is to
stop the airtime assaults and keep me off the televisions of
panem.
we receive next to no information about what is
happening. our screens never come on, and we get only
brief audio updates from coin about the nature of the
bombs. certainly, the war is still being waged, but as to its
status, we're in the dark.
inside the bunker, cooperation is the order of the day.
we adhere to a strict schedule for meals and bathing,
exercise and sleep. small periods of socialization are
granted to alleviate the tedium. our space becomes very
popular because both children and adults have a
fascination with buttercup. he attains celebrity status with
his evening game of crazy cat. i created this by accident a
few years ago, during a winter blackout. you simply wiggle
a flashlight beam around on the floor, and buttercup tries to
catch it. i'm petty enough to enjoy it because i think it makes
him look stupid. inexplicably, everyone here thinks he's
clever and delightful. i'm even issued a special set of
batteries--an enormous waste--to be used for this purpose.
the citizens of 13 are truly starved for entertainment.
it's on the third night, during our game, that i answer the
question eating away at me. crazy cat becomes a
metaphor for my situation. i am buttercup. peeta, the thing i
want so badly to secure, is the light. as long as buttercup
feels he has the chance of catching the elusive light under
his paws, he's bristling with aggression. (that's how i've
been since i left the arena, with peeta alive.) when the light
goes out completely, buttercup's temporarily distraught and
confused, but he recovers and moves on to other things.
(that's what would happen if peeta died.) but the one thing
that sends buttercup into a tailspin is when i leave the light
on but put it hopelessly out of his reach, high on the wall,
beyond even his jumping skills. he paces below the wall,
wails, and can't be comforted or distracted. he's useless
until i shut the light off. (that's what snow is trying to do to
me now, only i don't know what form his game takes.)
maybe this realization on my part is all snow needs.
thinking that peeta was in his possession and being
tortured for rebel information was bad. but thinking that he's
being tortured specifically to incapacitate me is
unendurable. and it's under the weight of this revelation that
i truly begin to break.
after crazy cat, we're directed to bed. the power's
been coming and going; sometimes the lamps burn at full
brightness, other times we squint at one another in the
brownouts. at bedtime they turn the lamps to near darkness
and activate safety lights in each space. prim, who's
decided the walls will hold up, snuggles with buttercup on
the lower bunk. my mother's on the upper. i offer to take a
bunk, but they make me keep to the floor mattress since i
flail around so much when i'm sleeping.
i'm not flailing now, as my muscles are rigid with the
tension of holding myself together. the pain over my heart
returns, and from it i imagine tiny fissures spreading out into
my body. through my torso, down my arms and legs, over
my face, leaving it crisscrossed with cracks. one good jolt
of a bunker missile and i could shatter into strange, razorsharp
shards.
when the restless, wiggling majority has settled into
sleep, i carefully extricate myself from my blanket and tiptoe
through the cavern until i find finnick, feeling for some
unspecified reason that he will understand. he sits under
the safety light in his space, knotting his rope, not even
pretending to rest. as i whisper my discovery of snow's
plan to break me, it dawns on me. this strategy is very old
news to finnick. it's what broke him.
this is what they're doing to you with annie, isn't it? i
ask.
"well, they didn't arrest her because they thought she'd
be a wealth of rebel information, he says. ""they know i'd"
never have risked telling her anything like that. for her own
protection."
oh, finnick. i'm so sorry, i say.
no, i'm sorry. that i didn't warn you somehow, he tells
me.
suddenly, a memory surfaces. i'm strapped to my bed,
mad with rage and grief after the rescue. finnick is trying to
console me about peeta. "they'll figure out he doesn't
know anything pretty fast. and they won't kill him if they
think they can use him against you."
"you did warn me, though. on the hovercraft. only
when you said they'd use peeta against me, i thought you
meant like bait. to lure me into the capitol somehow, i"
say.
"i shouldn't have said even that. it was too late for it to
be of any help to you. since i hadn't warned you before the
quarter quell, i should've shut up about how snow
operates. finnick yanks on the end of his rope, and an"
intricate knot becomes a straight line again. "it's just that i
didn't understand when i met you. after your first games, i
thought the whole romance was an act on your part. we all
expected you'd continue that strategy. but it wasn't until
peeta hit the force field and nearly died that i--" finnick
hesitates.
i think back to the arena. how i sobbed when finnick
revived peeta. the quizzical look on finnick's face. the
way he excused my behavior, blaming it on my pretend
pregnancy. "that you what?"
"that i knew i'd misjudged you. that you do love him.
i'm not saying in what way. maybe you don't know yourself.
but anyone paying attention could see how much you care
about him, he says gently."
anyone? on snow's visit before the victory tour, he
challenged me to erase any doubts of my love for peeta.
convince me, snow said. it seems, under that hot pink
sky with peeta's life in limbo, i finally did. and in doing so, i
gave him the weapon he needed to break me.
finnick and i sit for a long time in silence, watching the
knots bloom and vanish, before i can ask, "how do you
bear it?"
finnick looks at me in disbelief. "i don't, katniss!
obviously, i don't. i drag myself out of nightmares each
morning and find there's no relief in waking." something in
my expression stops him. "better not to give in to it. it takes
ten times as long to put yourself back together as it does to
fall apart."
well, he must know. i take a deep breath, forcing
myself back into one piece.
the more you can distract yourself, the better, he
says. "first thing tomorrow, we'll get you your own rope.
until then, take mine."
i spend the rest of the night on my mattress
obsessively making knots, holding them up for buttercup's
inspection. if one looks suspicious, he swipes it out of the
air and bites it a few times to make sure it's dead. by
morning, my fingers are sore, but i'm still holding on.
with twenty-four hours of quiet behind us, coin finally
announces we can leave the bunker. our old quarters have
been destroyed by the bombings. everyone must follow
exact directions to their new compartments. we clean our
spaces, as directed, and file obediently toward the door.
before i'm halfway there, boggs appears and pulls me
from the line. he signals for gale and finnick to join us.
people move aside to let us by. some even smile at me
since the crazy cat game seems to have made me more
lovable. out the door, up the stairs, down the hall to one of
those multidirectional elevators, and finally we arrive at
special defense. nothing along our route has been
damaged, but we are still very deep.
boggs ushers us into a room virtually identical to
command. coin, plutarch, haymitch, cressida, and
everybody else around the table looks exhausted.
someone has finally broken out the coffee--although i'm
sure it's viewed only as an emergency stimulant--and
plutarch has both hands wrapped tightly around his cup as
if at any moment it might be taken away.
there's no small talk. "we need all four of you suited
up and aboveground," says the president. "you have two
hours to get footage showing the damage from the
bombing, establish that thirteen's military unit remains not
only functional but dominant, and, most important, that the
mockingjay is still alive. any questions?"
can we have a coffee? asks finnick.
steaming cups are handed out. i stare distastefully at
the shiny black liquid, never having been much of a fan of
the stuff, but thinking it might help me stay on my feet.
finnick sloshes some cream in my cup and reaches into
the sugar bowl. "want a sugar cube?" he asks in his old
seductive voice. that's how we met, with finnick offering
me sugar. surrounded by horses and chariots, costumed
and painted for the crowds, before we were allies. before i
had any idea what made him tick. the memory actually
coaxes a smile out of me. "here, it improves the taste," he
says in his real voice, plunking three cubes in my cup.
as i turn to go suit up as the mockingjay, i catch gale
watching me and finnick unhappily. what now? does he
actually think something's going on between us? maybe he
saw me go to finnick's last night. i would've passed the
hawthornes' space to get there. i guess that probably
rubbed him the wrong way. me seeking out finnick's
company instead of his. well, fine. i've got rope burn on my
fingers, i can barely hold my eyes open, and a camera
crew's waiting for me to do something brilliant. and snow's
got peeta. gale can think whatever he wants.
in my new remake room in special defense, my prep
team slaps me into my mockingjay suit, arranges my hair,
and applies minimal makeup before my coffee's even
cooled. in ten minutes, the cast and crew of the next propos
are making the circuitous trek to the outside. i slurp my
coffee as we travel, finding that the cream and sugar greatly
enhance its flavor. as i knock back the dregs that have
settled to the bottom of the cup, i feel a slight buzz start to
run through my veins.
after climbing a final ladder, boggs hits a lever that
opens a trapdoor. fresh air rushes in. i take big gulps and
for the first time allow myself to feel how much i hated the
bunker. we emerge into the woods, and my hands run
through the leaves overhead. some are just starting to turn.
what day is it? i ask no one in particular. boggs tells me
september begins next week.
september. that means snow has had peeta in his
clutches for five, maybe six weeks. i examine a leaf on my
palm and see i'm shaking. i can't will myself to stop. i blame
the coffee and try to focus on slowing my breathing, which
is far too rapid for my pace.
debris begins to litter the forest floor. we come to our
first crater, thirty yards wide and i can't tell how deep. very.
boggs says anyone on the first ten levels would likely have
been killed. we skirt the pit and continue on.
can you rebuild it? gale asks.
"not anytime soon. that one didn't get much. a few
backup generators and a poultry farm, says boggs. ""we'll"
just seal it off."
the trees disappear as we enter the area inside the
fence. the craters are ringed with a mixture of old and new
rubble. before the bombing, very little of the current 13 was
aboveground. a few guard stations. the training area.
about a foot of the top floor of our building--where
buttercup's window jutted out--with several feet of steel on
top of it. even that was never meant to withstand more than
a superficial attack.
"how much of an edge did the boy's warning give
you? asks haymitch."
"about ten minutes before our own systems would've
detected the missiles, says boggs."
but it did help, right? i ask. i can't bear it if he says
no.
absolutely, boggs replies. "civilian evacuation was
completed. seconds count when you're under attack. ten
minutes meant lives saved."
prim, i think. and gale. they were in the bunker only a
couple of minutes before the first missile hit. peeta might
have saved them. add their names to the list of things i can
never stop owing him for.
cressida has the idea to film me in front of the ruins of
the old justice building, which is something of a joke since
the capitol's been using it as a backdrop for fake news
broadcasts for years, to show that the district no longer
existed. now, with the recent attack, the justice building
sits about ten yards away from the edge of a new crater.
as we approach what used to be the grand entrance,
gale points out something and the whole party slows down.
i don't know what the problem is at first and then i see the
ground strewn with fresh pink and red roses. "don't touch
them!" i yell. "they're for me!"
the sickeningly sweet smell hits my nose, and my
heart begins to hammer against my chest. so i didn't
imagine it. the rose on my dresser. before me lies snow's
second delivery. long-stemmed pink and red beauties, the
very flowers that decorated the set where peeta and i
performed our post-victory interview. flowers not meant for
one, but for a pair of lovers.
i explain to the others as best i can. upon inspection,
they appear to be harmless, if genetically enhanced,
flowers. two dozen roses. slightly wilted. most likely
dropped after the last bombing. a crew in special suits
collects them and carts them away. i feel certain they will
find nothing extraordinary in them, though. snow knows
exactly what he's doing to me. it's like having cinna beaten
to a pulp while i watch from my tribute tube. designed to
unhinge me.
like then, i try to rally and fight back. but as cressida
gets castor and pollux in place, i feel my anxiety building.
i'm so tired, so wired, and so unable to keep my mind on
anything but peeta since i've seen the roses. the coffee
was a huge mistake. what i didn't need was a stimulant. my
body visibly shakes and i can't seem to catch my breath.
after days in the bunker, i'm squinting no matter what
direction i turn, and the light hurts. even in the cool breeze,
sweat trickles down my face.
so, what exactly do you need from me again? i ask.
"just a few quick lines that show you're alive and still
fighting, says cressida."
okay. i take my position and then i'm staring into the
red light. staring. staring. "i'm sorry, i've got nothing."
cressida walks up to me. "you feeling okay?" i nod.
she pulls a small cloth from her pocket and blots my face.
how about we do the old q-and-a thing?
yeah. that would help, i think. i cross my arms to hide
the shaking. glance at finnick, who gives me a thumbs-up.
but he's looking pretty shaky himself.
cressida's back in position now. "so, katniss. you've
survived the capitol bombing of thirteen. how did it
compare with what you experienced on the ground in
eight?"
"we were so far underground this time, there was no
real danger. thirteen's alive and well and so am-- my voice"
cuts off in a dry, squeaking sound.
try the line again, says cressida. "'thirteen's alive
and well and so am i.'"
i take a breath, trying to force air down into my
diaphragm. "thirteen's alive and so--" no, that's wrong.
i swear i can still smell those roses.
"katniss, just this one line and you're done today. i
promise, says cressida. ""'thirteen's alive and well and so"
am i.'"
i swing my arms to loosen myself up. place my fists on
my hips. then drop them to my sides. saliva's filling my
mouth at a ridiculous rate and i feel vomit at the back of my
throat. i swallow hard and open my lips so i can get the
stupid line out and go hide in the woods and--that's when i
start crying.
it's impossible to be the mockingjay. impossible to
complete even this one sentence. because now i know that
everything i say will be directly taken out on peeta. result in
his torture. but not his death, no, nothing so merciful as that.
snow will ensure that his life is much worse than death.
cut, i hear cressida say quietly.
what's wrong with her? plutarch says under his
breath.
she's figured out how snow's using peeta, says
finnick.
there's something like a collective sigh of regret from
the semicircle of people spread out before me. because i
know this now. because there will never be a way for me to
not know this again. because, beyond the military
disadvantage losing a mockingjay entails, i am broken.
several sets of arms would embrace me. but in the
end, the only person i truly want to comfort me is haymitch,
because he loves peeta, too. i reach out for him and say
something like his name and he's there, holding me and
patting my back. "it's okay. it'll be okay, sweetheart." he sits
me on a length of broken marble pillar and keeps an arm
around me while i sob.
i can't do this anymore, i say.
i know, he says.
"all i can think of is--what he's going to do to peeta--
because i'm the mockingjay! i get out."
i know. haymitch's arm tightens around me.
"did you see? how weird he acted? what are they--
doing to him? i'm gasping for air between sobs, but i"
manage one last phrase. "it's my fault!" and then i cross
some line into hysteria and there's a needle in my arm and
the world slips away.
it must be strong, whatever they shot into me, because
it's a full day before i come to. my sleep wasn't peaceful,
though. i have the sense of emerging from a world of dark,
haunted places where i traveled alone. haymitch sits in the
chair by my bed, his skin waxen, his eyes bloodshot. i
remember about peeta and start to tremble again.
haymitch reaches out and squeezes my shoulder. "it's
all right. we're going to try to get peeta out."
what? that makes no sense.
"plutarch's sending in a rescue team. he has people
on the inside. he thinks we can get peeta back alive, he"
says.
why didn't we before? i say.
"because it's costly. but everyone agrees this is the
thing to do. it's the same choice we made in the arena. to
do whatever it takes to keep you going. we can't lose the
mockingjay now. and you can't perform unless you know
snow can't take it out on peeta. haymitch offers me a cup."
here, drink something.
i slowly sit up and take a sip of water. "what do you
mean, costly?"
he shrugs. "covers will be blown. people may die. but
keep in mind that they're dying every day. and it's not just
peeta; we're getting annie out for finnick, too."
where is he? i ask.
"behind that screen, sleeping his sedative off. he lost
it right after we knocked you out, says haymitch. i smile a"
little, feel a bit less weak. "yeah, it was a really excellent
shoot. you two cracked up and boggs left to arrange the
mission to get peeta. we're officially in reruns."
well, if boggs is leading it, that's a plus, i say.
"oh, he's on top of it. it was volunteer only, but he
pretended not to notice me waving my hand in the air, says"
haymitch. "see? he's already demonstrated good
judgment."
something's wrong. haymitch's trying a little too hard
to cheer me up. it's not really his style. "so who else
volunteered?"
i think there were seven altogether, he says
evasively.
i get a bad feeling in the pit of my stomach. "who else,
haymitch?" i insist.
haymitch finally drops the good-natured act. "you
know who else, katniss. you know who stepped up first."
of course i do.
gale.
12
today i might lose both of them.
i try to imagine a world where both gale's and peeta's
voices have ceased. hands stilled. eyes unblinking. i'm
standing over their bodies, having a last look, leaving the
room where they lie. but when i open the door to step out
into the world, there's only a tremendous void. a pale gray
nothingness that is all my future holds.
"do you want me to have them sedate you until it's
over? asks haymitch. he's not joking. this is a man who"
spent his adult life at the bottom of a bottle, trying to
anesthetize himself against the capitol's crimes. the
sixteen-year-old boy who won the second quarter quell
must have had people he loved--family, friends, a
sweetheart maybe--that he fought to get back to. where are
they now? how is it that until peeta and i were thrust upon
him, there was no one at all in his life? what did snow do to
them?
no, i say. "i want to go to the capitol. i want to be part
of the rescue mission."
they're gone, says haymitch.
"how long ago did they leave? i could catch up. i could-
- what? what could i do?"
haymitch shakes his head. "it'll never happen. you're
too valuable and too vulnerable. there was talk of sending
you to another district to divert the capitol's attention while
the rescue takes place. but no one felt you could handle it."
please, haymitch! i'm begging now. "i have to do
something. i can't just sit here waiting to hear if they died.
there must be something i can do!"
all right. let me talk to plutarch. you stay put. but i
can't. haymitch's footsteps are still echoing in the outer hall
when i fumble my way through the slit in the dividing curtain
to find finnick sprawled out on his stomach, his hands
twisted in his pillowcase. although it's cowardly--cruel even-
#NAME?
reality, i go ahead and do it because i can't stand to face
this by myself.
as i explain our situation, his initial agitation
mysteriously ebbs. "don't you see, katniss, this will decide
things. one way or the other. by the end of the day, they'll
either be dead or with us. it's...it's more than we could hope
for!"
well, that's a sunny view of our situation. and yet
there's something calming about the idea that this torment
could come to an end.
the curtain yanks back and there's haymitch. he has a
job for us, if we can pull it together. they still need postbombing
footage of 13. "if we can get it in the next few
hours, beetee can air it leading up to the rescue, and
maybe keep the capitol's attention elsewhere."
yes, a distraction, says finnick. "a decoy of sorts."
"what we really need is something so riveting that
even president snow won't be able to tear himself away.
got anything like that? asks haymitch."
having a job that might help the mission snaps me into
focus. while i knock down breakfast and get prepped, i try
to think of what i might say. president snow must be
wondering how that blood-splattered floor and his roses are
affecting me. if he wants me broken, then i will have to be
whole. but i don't think i will convince him of anything by
shouting a couple of defiant lines at the camera. besides,
that won't buy the rescue team any time. outbursts are
short. it's stories that take time.
i don't know if it will work, but when the television
crew's all assembled aboveground, i ask cressida if she
could start out by asking me about peeta. i take a seat on
the fallen marble pillar where i had my breakdown, wait for
the red light and cressida's question.
how did you meet peeta? she asks.
and then i do the thing that haymitch has wanted since
my first interview. i open up. "when i met peeta, i was
eleven years old, and i was almost dead." i talk about that
awful day when i tried to sell the baby clothes in the rain,
how peeta's mother chased me from the bakery door, and
how he took a beating to bring me the loaves of bread that
saved our lives. "we had never even spoken. the first time
i ever talked to peeta was on the train to the games."
but he was already in love with you, says cressida.
i guess so. i allow myself a small smile.
how are you doing with the separation? she asks.
"not well. i know at any moment snow could kill him.
especially since he warned thirteen about the bombing. it's
a terrible thing to live with, i say. ""but because of what"
they're putting him through, i don't have any reservations
anymore. about doing whatever it takes to destroy the
capitol. i'm finally free." i turn my gaze skyward and watch
the flight of a hawk across the sky. "president snow once
admitted to me that the capitol was fragile. at the time, i
didn't know what he meant. it was hard to see clearly
because i was so afraid. now i'm not. the capitol's fragile
because it depends on the districts for everything. food,
energy, even the peacekeepers that police us. if we
declare our freedom, the capitol collapses. president
snow, thanks to you, i'm officially declaring mine today."
i've been sufficient, if not dazzling. everyone loves the
bread story. but it's my message to president snow that
gets the wheels spinning in plutarch's brain. he hastily calls
finnick and haymitch over and they have a brief but intense
conversation that i can see haymitch isn't happy with.
plutarch seems to win--finnick's pale but nodding his head
by the end of it.
as finnick moves to take my seat before the camera,
haymitch tells him, "you don't have to do this."
yes, i do. if it will help her. finnick balls up his rope in
his hand. "i'm ready."
i don't know what to expect. a love story about annie?
an account of the abuses in district 4? but finnick odair
takes a completely different tack.
president snow used to...sell me...my body, that is,
finnick begins in a flat, removed tone. "i wasn't the only
one. if a victor is considered desirable, the president gives
them as a reward or allows people to buy them for an
exorbitant amount of money. if you refuse, he kills someone
you love. so you do it."
that explains it, then. finnick's parade of lovers in the
capitol. they were never real lovers. just people like our
old head peacekeeper, cray, who bought desperate girls
to devour and discard because he could. i want to interrupt
the taping and beg finnick's forgiveness for every false
thought i've ever had about him. but we have a job to do,
and i sense finnick's role will be far more effective than
mine.
i wasn't the only one, but i was the most popular, he
says. "and perhaps the most defenseless, because the
people i loved were so defenseless. to make themselves
feel better, my patrons would make presents of money or
jewelry, but i found a much more valuable form of payment."
secrets, i think. that's what finnick told me his lovers
paid him in, only i thought the whole arrangement was by
his choice.
secrets, he says, echoing my thoughts. "and this is
where you're going to want to stay tuned, president snow,
because so very many of them were about you. but let's
begin with some of the others."
finnick begins to weave a tapestry so rich in detail that
you can't doubt its authenticity. tales of strange sexual
appetites, betrayals of the heart, bottomless greed, and
bloody power plays. drunken secrets whispered over damp
pillow-cases in the dead of night. finnick was someone
bought and sold. a district slave. a handsome one,
certainly, but in reality, harmless. who would he tell? and
who would believe him if he did? but some secrets are too
delicious not to share. i don't know the people finnick
names--all seem to be prominent capitol citizens--but i
know, from listening to the chatter of my prep team, the
attention the most mild slip in judgment can draw. if a bad
haircut can lead to hours of gossip, what will charges of
incest, back-stabbing, blackmail, and arson produce? even
as the waves of shock and recrimination roll over the
capitol, the people there will be waiting, as i am now, to
hear about the president.
"and now, on to our good president coriolanus
snow, says finnick. ""such a young man when he rose to"
power. such a clever one to keep it. how, you must ask
yourself, did he do it? one word. that's all you really need
to know. poison." finnick goes back to snow's political
ascension, which i know nothing of, and works his way up to
the present, pointing out case after case of the mysterious
deaths of snow's adversaries or, even worse, his allies
who had the potential to become threats. people dropping
dead at a feast or slowly, inexplicably declining into
shadows over a period of months. blamed on bad shellfish,
elusive viruses, or an overlooked weakness in the aorta.
snow drinking from the poisoned cup himself to deflect
suspicion. but antidotes don't always work. they say that's
why he wears the roses that reek of perfume. they say it's
to cover the scent of blood from the mouth sores that will
never heal. they say, they say, they say...snow has a list
and no one knows who will be next.
poison. the perfect weapon for a snake.
since my opinion of the capitol and its noble president
are already so low, i can't say finnick's allegations shock
me. they seem to have far more effect on the displaced
capitol rebels like my crew and fulvia--even plutarch
occasionally reacts in surprise, maybe wondering how a
specific tidbit passed him by. when finnick finishes, they
just keep the cameras rolling until finally he has to be the
one to say "cut."
the crew hurries inside to edit the material, and
plutarch leads finnick off for a chat, probably to see if he
has any more stories. i'm left with haymitch in the rubble,
wondering if finnick's fate would have one day been mine.
why not? snow could have gotten a really good price for
the girl on fire.
is that what happened to you? i ask haymitch.
"no. my mother and younger brother. my girl. they
were all dead two weeks after i was crowned victor.
because of that stunt i pulled with the force field, he"
answers. "snow had no one to use against me."
i'm surprised he didn't just kill you, i say.
"oh, no. i was the example. the person to hold up to
the young finnicks and johannas and cashmeres. of what
could happen to a victor who caused problems, says"
haymitch. "but he knew he had no leverage against me."
until peeta and i came along, i say softly. i don't even
get a shrug in return.
with our job done, there's nothing left for finnick and
me to do but wait. we try to fill the dragging minutes in
special defense. tie knots. push our lunch around our
bowls. blow things up on the shooting range. because of
the danger of detection, no communication comes from the
rescue team. at 15:00, the designated hour, we stand
tense and silent in the back of a room full of screens and
computers and watch beetee and his team try to dominate
the airwaves. his usual fidgety distraction is replaced with
a determination i have never seen. most of my interview
doesn't make the cut, just enough to show i am alive and
still defiant. it is finnick's salacious and gory account of the
capitol that takes the day. is beetee's skill improving? or
are his counterparts in the capitol a little too fascinated to
want to tune finnick out? for the next sixty minutes, the
capitol feed alternates between the standard afternoon
newscast, finnick, and attempts to black it all out. but the
rebel techno team manages to override even the latter and,
in a real coup, keeps control for almost the entire attack on
snow.
let it go! says beetee, throwing up his hands,
relinquishing the broadcast back to the capitol. he mops
his face with a cloth. "if they're not out of there by now,
they're all dead." he spins in his chair to see finnick and
me reacting to his words. "it was a good plan, though. did
plutarch show it to you?"
of course not. beetee takes us to another room and
shows us how the team, with the help of rebel insiders, will
attempt--has attempted--to free the victors from an
underground prison. it seems to have involved knockout
gas distributed by the ventilation system, a power failure,
the detonation of a bomb in a government building several
miles from the prison, and now the disruption of the
broadcast. beetee's glad we find the plan hard to follow,
because then our enemies will, too.
like your electricity trap in the arena? i ask.
exactly. and see how well that worked out? says
beetee.
well...not really, i think.
finnick and i try to station ourselves in command,
where surely first word of the rescue will come, but we are
barred because serious war business is being carried out.
we refuse to leave special defense and end up waiting in
the hummingbird room for news.
making knots. making knots. no word. making knots.
tick-tock. this is a clock. do not think of gale. do not think
of peeta. making knots. we do not want dinner. fingers
raw and bleeding. finnick finally gives up and assumes the
hunched position he took in the arena when the jabberjays
attacked. i perfect my miniature noose. the words of "the
hanging tree" replay in my head. gale and peeta. peeta
and gale.
did you love annie right away, finnick? i ask.
no. a long time passes before he adds, "she crept
up on me."
i search my heart, but at the moment the only person i
can feel creeping up on me is snow.
it must be midnight, it must be tomorrow when
haymitch pushes open the door. "they're back. we're
wanted in the hospital." my mouth opens with a flood of
questions that he cuts off with "that's all i know."
i want to run, but finnick's acting so strange, as if he's
lost the ability to move, so i take his hand and lead him like
a small child. through special defense, into the elevator
that goes this way and that, and on to the hospital wing. the
place is in an uproar, with doctors shouting orders and the
wounded being wheeled through the halls in their beds.
we're sideswiped by a gurney bearing an
unconscious, emaciated young woman with a shaved head.
her flesh shows bruises and oozing scabs. johanna
mason. who actually knew rebel secrets. at least the one
about me. and this is how she has paid for it.
through a doorway, i catch a glimpse of gale, stripped
to the waist, perspiration streaming down his face as a
doctor removes something from under his shoulder blade
with a long pair of tweezers. wounded, but alive. i call his
name, start toward him until a nurse pushes me back and
shuts me out.
finnick! something between a shriek and a cry of
joy. a lovely if somewhat bedraggled young woman--dark
tangled hair, sea green eyes--runs toward us in nothing but
a sheet. "finnick!" and suddenly, it's as if there's no one in
the world but these two, crashing through space to reach
each other. they collide, enfold, lose their balance, and
slam against a wall, where they stay. clinging into one
being. indivisible.
a pang of jealousy hits me. not for either finnick or
annie but for their certainty. no one seeing them could
doubt their love.
boggs, looking a little worse for wear but uninjured,
finds haymitch and me. "we got them all out. except
enobaria. but since she's from two, we doubt she's being
held anyway. peeta's at the end of the hall. the effects of
the gas are just wearing off. you should be there when he
wakes."
peeta.
alive and well--maybe not well but alive and here.
away from snow. safe. here. with me. in a minute i can
touch him. see his smile. hear his laugh.
haymitch's grinning at me. "come on, then," he says.
i'm light-headed with giddiness. what will i say? oh,
who cares what i say? peeta will be ecstatic no matter what
i do. he'll probably be kissing me anyway. i wonder if it will
feel like those last kisses on the beach in the arena, the
ones i haven't dared let myself consider until this moment.
peeta's awake already, sitting on the side of the bed,
looking bewildered as a trio of doctors reassure him, flash
lights in his eyes, check his pulse. i'm disappointed that
mine was not the first face he saw when he woke, but he
sees it now. his features register disbelief and something
more intense that i can't quite place. desire? desperation?
surely both, for he sweeps the doctors aside, leaps to his
feet, and moves toward me. i run to meet him, my arms
extended to embrace him. his hands are reaching for me,
too, to caress my face, i think.
my lips are just forming his name when his fingers lock
around my throat.
13
the cold collar chafes my neck and makes the
shivering even harder to control. at least i am no longer in
the claustrophobic tube, while the machines click and whir
around me, listening to a disembodied voice telling me to
hold still while i try to convince myself i can still breathe.
even now, when i've been assured there will be no
permanent damage, i hunger for air.
the medical team's main concerns--damage to my
spinal cord, airway, veins, and arteries--have been allayed.
bruising, hoarseness, the sore larynx, this strange little
cough--not to be worried about. it will all be fine. the
mockingjay will not lose her voice. where, i want to ask, is
the doctor who determines if i am losing my mind? only i'm
not supposed to talk right now. i can't even thank boggs
when he comes to check on me. to look me over and tell
me he's seen a lot worse injuries among the soldiers when
they teach choke holds in training.
it was boggs who knocked out peeta with one blow
before any permanent damage could be done. i know
haymitch would have come to my defense if he hadn't been
utterly unprepared. to catch both haymitch and myself off
guard is a rare thing. but we have been so consumed with
saving peeta, so tortured by having him in the capitol's
hands, that the elation at having him back blinded us. if i'd
had a private reunion with peeta, he would have killed me.
now that he's deranged.
no, not deranged, i remind myself. hijacked. that's
the word i heard pass between plutarch and haymitch as i
was wheeled past them in the hallway. hijacked. i don't
know what it means.
prim, who appeared moments after the attack and has
stayed as close to me as possible ever since, spreads
another blanket over me. "i think they'll take the collar off
soon, katniss. you won't be so cold then." my mother,
who's been assisting in a complicated surgery, has still not
been informed of peeta's assault. prim takes one of my
hands, which is clutched in a fist, and massages it until it
opens and blood begins to flow through my fingers again.
she's starting on the second fist when the doctors show up,
remove the collar, and give me a shot of something for pain
and swelling. i lie, as instructed, with my head still, not
aggravating the injuries to my neck.
plutarch, haymitch, and beetee have been waiting in
the hall for the doctors to give them clearance to see me. i
don't know if they've told gale, but since he's not here, i
assume they haven't. plutarch ushers the doctors out and
tries to order prim to go as well, but she says, "no. if you
force me to leave, i'll go directly to surgery and tell my
mother everything that's happened. and i warn you, she
doesn't think much of a gamemaker calling the shots on
katniss's life. especially when you've taken such poor care
of her."
plutarch looks offended, but haymitch chuckles. "i'd let
it go, plutarch," he says. prim stays.
"so, katniss, peeta's condition has come as a shock
to all of us, says plutarch. ""we couldn't help but notice his"
deterioration in the last two interviews. obviously, he'd
been abused, and we put his psychological state down to
that. now we believe something more was going on. that
the capitol has been subjecting him to a rather uncommon
technique known as hijacking. beetee?"
i'm sorry, beetee says, "but i can't tell you all the
specifics of it, katniss. the capitol's very secretive about
this form of torture, and i believe the results are
inconsistent. this we do know. it's a type of fear
conditioning. the term hijack comes from an old english
word that means 'to capture,' or even better, 'seize.' we
believe it was chosen because the technique involves the
use of tracker jacker venom, and the jack suggested
hijack. you were stung in your first hunger games, so
unlike most of us, you have firsthand knowledge of the
effects of the venom."
terror. hallucinations. nightmarish visions of losing
those i love. because the venom targets the part of the
brain that houses fear.
"i'm sure you remember how frightening it was. did you
also suffer mental confusion in the aftermath? asks"
beetee. "a sense of being unable to judge what was true
and what was false? most people who have been stung
and lived to tell about it report something of the kind."
yes. that encounter with peeta. even after i was
clearheaded, i wasn't sure if he had saved my life by taking
on cato or if i'd imagined it.
"recall is made more difficult because memories can
be changed. beetee taps his forehead. ""brought to the"
forefront of your mind, altered, and saved again in the
revised form. now imagine that i ask you to remember
something--either with a verbal suggestion or by making
you watch a tape of the event--and while that experience is
refreshed, i give you a dose of tracker jacker venom. not
enough to induce a three-day blackout. just enough to
infuse the memory with fear and doubt. and that's what your
brain puts in long-term storage."
i start to feel sick. prim asks the question that's in my
mind. "is that what they've done to peeta? taken his
memories of katniss and distorted them so they're scary?"
beetee nods. "so scary that he'd see her as lifethreatening.
that he might try to kill her. yes, that's our
current theory."
i cover my face with my arms because this isn't
happening. it isn't possible. for someone to make peeta
forget he loves me...no one could do that.
but you can reverse it, right? asks prim.
um...very little data on that, says plutarch. "none,
really. if hijacking rehabilitation has been attempted before,
we have no access to those records."
well, you're going to try, aren't you? prim persists.
"you're not just going to lock him up in some padded room
and leave him to suffer?"
of course, we'll try, prim, says beetee. "it's just, we
don't know to what degree we'll succeed. if any. my guess
is that fearful events are the hardest to root out. they're the
ones we naturally remember the best, after all."
"and apart from his memories of katniss, we don't yet
know what else has been tampered with, says plutarch."
"we're putting together a team of mental health and military
professionals to come up with a counterattack. i, personally,
feel optimistic that he'll make a full recovery."
do you? asks prim caustically. "and what do you
think, haymitch?"
i shift my arms slightly so i can see his expression
through the crack. he's exhausted and discouraged as he
admits, "i think peeta might get somewhat better. but...i
don't think he'll ever be the same." i snap my arms back
together, closing the crack, shutting them all out.
at least he's alive, says plutarch, as if he's losing
patience with the lot of us. "snow executed peeta's stylist
and his prep team on live television tonight. we've no idea
what happened to effie trinket. peeta's damaged, but he's
here. with us. and that's a definite improvement over his
situation twelve hours ago. let's keep that in mind, all
right?"
plutarch's attempt to cheer me up--laced with the news
of another four, possibly five, murders--somehow backfires.
portia. peeta's prep team. effie. the effort to fight back
tears makes my throat throb until i'm gasping again.
eventually, they have no choice but to sedate me.
when i wake, i wonder if this will be the only way i
sleep now, with drugs shot into my arm. i'm glad i'm not
supposed to talk for the next few days, because there's
nothing i want to say. or do. in fact, i'm a model patient, my
lethargy taken for restraint, obedience to the doctors'
orders. i no longer feel like crying. in fact, i can only manage
to hold on to one simple thought: an image of snow's face
accompanied by the whisper in my head. i will kill you.
my mother and prim take turns nursing me, coaxing
me to swallow bites of soft food. people come in
periodically to give me updates on peeta's condition. the
high levels of tracker jacker venom are working their way
out of his body. he's being treated only by strangers,
natives of 13--no one from home or the capitol has been
allowed to see him--to keep any dangerous memories from
triggering. a team of specialists works long hours
designing a strategy for his recovery.
gale's not supposed to visit me, as he's confined to
bed with some kind of shoulder wound. but on the third
night, after i've been medicated and the lights turned down
low for bedtime, he slips silently into my room. he doesn't
speak, just runs his fingers over the bruises on my neck
with a touch as light as moth wings, plants a kiss between
my eyes, and disappears.
the next morning, i'm discharged from the hospital with
instructions to move quietly and speak only when
necessary. i'm not imprinted with a schedule, so i wander
around aimlessly until prim's excused from her hospital
duties to take me to our family's latest compartment. 2212.
identical to the last one, but with no window.
buttercup has now been issued a daily food allowance
and a pan of sand that's kept under the bathroom sink. as
prim tucks me into bed, he hops up on my pillow, vying for
her attention. she cradles him but stays focused on me.
"katniss, i know this whole thing with peeta is terrible for
you. but remember, snow worked on him for weeks, and
we've only had him for a few days. there's a chance that
the old peeta, the one who loves you, is still inside. trying
to get back to you. don't give up on him."
i look at my little sister and think how she has inherited
the best qualities our family has to offer: my mother's
healing hands, my father's level head, and my fight. there's
something else there as well, something entirely her own.
an ability to look into the confusing mess of life and see
things for what they are. is it possible she could be right?
that peeta could return to me?
i have to get back to the hospital, prim says, placing
buttercup on the bed beside me. "you two keep each other
company, okay?"
buttercup springs off the bed and follows her to the
door, complaining loudly when he's left behind. we're about
as much company for each other as dirt. after maybe thirty
seconds, i know i can't stand being confined in the
subterranean cell, and leave buttercup to his own devices. i
get lost several times, but eventually i make my way down
to special defense. everyone i pass stares at the bruises,
and i can't help feeling self-conscious to the point that i tug
my collar up to my ears.
gale must have been released from the hospital this
morning as well, because i find him in one of the research
rooms with beetee. they're immersed, heads bent over a
drawing, taking a measurement. versions of the picture
litter the table and floor. tacked on the corkboard walls and
occupying several computer screens are other designs of
some sort. in the rough lines of one, i recognize gale's
twitch-up snare. "what are these?" i ask hoarsely, pulling
their attention from the sheet.
ah, katniss, you've found us out, says beetee
cheerfully.
what? is this a secret? i know gale's been down
here working with beetee a lot, but i assumed they were
messing around with bows and guns.
"not really. but i've felt a little guilty about it. stealing
gale away from you so much, beetee admits."
since i've spent most of my time in 13 disoriented,
worried, angry, being remade, or hospitalized, i can't say
gale's absences have inconvenienced me. things haven't
been exactly harmonious between us, either. but i let
beetee think he owes me. "i hope you've been putting his
time to good use."
come and see, he says, waving me over to a
computer screen.
this is what they've been doing. taking the
fundamental ideas behind gale's traps and adapting them
into weapons against humans. bombs mostly. it's less
about the mechanics of the traps than the psychology
behind them. booby-trapping an area that provides
something essential to survival. a water or food supply.
frightening prey so that a large number flee into a greater
destruction. endangering off-spring in order to draw in the
actual desired target, the parent. luring the victim into what
appears to be a safe haven--where death awaits it. at
some point, gale and beetee left the wilderness behind
and focused on more human impulses. like compassion. a
bomb explodes. time is allowed for people to rush to the
aid of the wounded. then a second, more powerful bomb
kills them as well.
that seems to be crossing some kind of line, i say.
so anything goes? they both stare at me--beetee with
doubt, gale with hostility. "i guess there isn't a rule book for
what might be unacceptable to do to another human being."
"sure there is. beetee and i have been following the
same rule book president snow used when he hijacked
peeta, says gale."
cruel, but to the point. i leave without further comment. i
feel if i don't get outside immediately, i'll just go ballistic, but
i'm still in special defense when i'm waylaid by haymitch.
come on, he says. "we need you back up at the
hospital."
what for? i ask.
they're going to try something on peeta, he answers.
"send in the most innocuous person from twelve they can
come up with. find someone peeta might share childhood
memories with, but nothing too close to you. they're
screening people now."
i know this will be a difficult task, since anyone peeta
shares childhood memories with would most likely be from
town, and almost none of those people escaped the
flames. but when we reach the hospital room that has been
turned into a work space for peeta's recovery team, there
she sits chatting with plutarch. delly cartwright. as always,
she gives me a smile that suggests i'm her best friend in
the world. she gives this smile to everyone. "katniss!" she
calls out.
hey, delly, i say. i'd heard she and her younger
brother had survived. her parents, who ran the shoe shop in
town, weren't as lucky. she looks older, wearing the drab
13 clothes that flatter no one, with her long yellow hair in a
practical braid instead of curls. delly's a bit thinner than i
remember, but she was one of the few kids in district 12
with a couple of pounds to spare. the diet here, the stress,
the grief of losing her parents have all, no doubt,
contributed. "how are you doing?" i ask.
oh, it's been a lot of changes all at once. her eyes fill
with tears. "but everyone's really nice here in thirteen, don't
you think?"
delly means it. she genuinely likes people. all people,
not just a select few she's spent years making up her mind
about.
they've made an effort to make us feel welcome, i
say. i think that's a fair statement without going overboard.
are you the one they've picked to see peeta?
"i guess so. poor peeta. poor you. i'll never
understand the capitol, she says."
better not to, maybe, i tell her.
delly's known peeta for a long time, says plutarch.
oh, yes! delly's face brightens. "we played together
from when we were little. i used to tell people he was my
brother."
what do you think? haymitch asks me. "anything that
might trigger memories of you?"
"we were all in the same class. but we never
overlapped much, i say."
"katniss was always so amazing, i never dreamed she
would notice me, says delly. ""the way she could hunt and"
go in the hob and everything. everyone admired her so."
haymitch and i both have to take a hard look at her
face to double-check if she's joking. to hear delly describe
it, i had next to no friends because i intimidated people by
being so exceptional. not true. i had next to no friends
because i wasn't friendly. leave it to delly to spin me into
something wonderful.
delly always thinks the best of everyone, i explain. "i
don't think peeta could have bad memories associated
with her." then i remember. "wait. in the capitol. when i
lied about recognizing the avox girl. peeta covered for me
and said she looked like delly."
i remember, says haymitch. "but i don't know. it
wasn't true. delly wasn't actually there. i don't think it can
compete with years of childhood memories."
especially with such a pleasant companion as delly,
says plutarch. "let's give it a shot."
plutarch, haymitch, and i go to the observation room
next to where peeta's confined. it's crowded with ten
members of his recovery team armed with pens and
clipboards. the one-way glass and audio setup allow us to
watch peeta secretly. he lies on the bed, his arms
strapped down. he doesn't fight the restraints, but his
hands fidget continuously. his expression seems more
lucid than when he tried to strangle me, but it's still not one
that belongs to him.
when the door quietly opens, his eyes widen in alarm,
then become confused. delly crosses the room tentatively,
but as she nears him she naturally breaks into a smile.
peeta? it's delly. from home.
delly? some of the clouds seem to clear. "delly. it's
you."
yes! she says with obvious relief. "how do you feel?"
awful. where are we? what's happened? asks
peeta.
here we go, says haymitch.
"i told her to steer clear of any mention of katniss or
the capitol, says plutarch. ""just see how much of home"
she could conjure up."
well...we're in district thirteen. we live here now,
says delly.
"that's what those people have been saying. but it
makes no sense. why aren't we home? asks peeta."
delly bites her lip. "there was...an accident. i miss
home badly, too. i was only just thinking about those chalk
drawings we used to do on the paving stones. yours were
so wonderful. remember when you made each one a
different animal?"
yeah. pigs and cats and things, says peeta. "you
said...about an accident?"
i can see the sheen of sweat on delly's forehead as
she tries to work around the question. "it was bad. no
one...could stay," she says haltingly.
hang in there, girl, says haymitch.
"but i know you're going to like it here, peeta. the
people have been really nice to us. there's always food
and clean clothes, and school's much more interesting,"
says delly.
why hasn't my family come to see me? peeta asks.
they can't. delly's tearing up again. "a lot of people
didn't get out of twelve. so we'll need to make a new life
here. i'm sure they could use a good baker. do you
remember when your father used to let us make dough girls
and boys?"
there was a fire, peeta says suddenly.
yes, she whispers.
twelve burned down, didn't it? because of her, says
peeta angrily. "because of katniss!" he begins to pull on
the restraints.
oh, no, peeta. it wasn't her fault, says delly.
did she tell you that? he hisses at her.
get her out of there, says plutarch. the door opens
immediately and delly begins to back toward it slowly.
she didn't have to. i was-- delly begins.
"because she's lying! she's a liar! you can't believe
anything she says! she's some kind of mutt the capitol
created to use against the rest of us! peeta shouts."
no, peeta. she's not a-- delly tries again.
don't trust her, delly, says peeta in a frantic voice. "i
did, and she tried to kill me. she killed my friends. my
family. don't even go near her! she's a mutt!"
a hand reaches through the doorway, pulls delly out,
and the door swings shut. but peeta keeps yelling. "a mutt!
she's a stinking mutt!"
not only does he hate me and want to kill me, he no
longer believes i'm human. it was less painful being
strangled.
around me the recovery team members scribble like
crazy, taking down every word. haymitch and plutarch grab
my arms and propel me out of the room. they lean me up
against a wall in the silent hallway. but i know peeta
continues to scream behind the door and the glass.
prim was wrong. peeta is irretrievable. "i can't stay
here anymore," i say numbly. "if you want me to be the
mockingjay, you'll have to send me away."
where do you want to go? asks haymitch.
the capitol. it's the only place i can think of where i
have a job to do.
can't do it, plutarch says. "not until all the districts
are secure. good news is, the fighting's almost over in all of
them but two. it's a tough nut to crack, though."
that's right. first the districts. next the capitol. and
then i hunt down snow.
fine, i say. "send me to two."
14
district 2 is a large district, as one might expect,
composed of a series of villages spread across the
mountains. each was originally associated with a mine or
quarry, although now, many are devoted to the housing and
training of peacekeepers. none of this would present much
of a challenge, since the rebels have 13's airpower on their
side, except for one thing: at the center of the district is a
virtually impenetrable mountain that houses the heart of the
capitol's military.
we've nicknamed the mountain the nut since i relayed
plutarch's "tough nut to crack" comment to the weary and
discouraged rebel leaders here. the nut was established
directly after the dark days, when the capitol had lost 13
and was desperate for a new underground stronghold. they
had some of their military resources situated on the
outskirts of the capitol itself--nuclear missiles, aircraft,
troops--but a significant chunk of their power was now
under an enemy's control. of course, there was no way they
could hope to replicate 13, which was the work of centuries.
however, in the old mines of nearby district 2, they saw
opportunity. from the air, the nut appeared to be just
another mountain with a few entrances on its faces. but
inside were vast cavernous spaces where slabs of stones
had been cut, hauled to the surface, and transported down
slippery narrow roads to make distant buildings. there was
even a train system to facilitate transporting the miners
from the nut to the very center of the main town in district 2.
it ran right to the square that peeta and i visited during the
victory tour, standing on the wide marble steps of the
justice building, trying not to look too closely at cato's and
clove's grieving families assembled below us.
it was not the most ideal terrain, plagued as it was by
mudslides, floods, and avalanches. but the advantages
outweighed the concerns. as they'd cut deep into the
mountain, the miners had left large pillars and walls of stone
to support the infrastructure. the capitol reinforced these
and set about making the mountain their new military base.
filling it with computer banks and meeting rooms, barracks
and arsenals. widening entrances to allow the exit of
hovercraft from the hangar, installing missile launchers. but
on the whole, leaving the exterior of the mountain largely
unchanged. a rough, rocky tangle of trees and wildlife. a
natural fortress to protect them from their enemies.
by the other districts' standards, the capitol babied
the inhabitants here. just by looking at the district 2 rebels,
you can tell they were decently fed and cared for in
childhood. some did end up as quarry and mine workers.
others were educated for jobs in the nut or funneled into
the ranks of peacekeepers. trained young and hard for
combat. the hunger games were an opportunity for wealth
and a kind of glory not seen elsewhere. of course, the
people of 2 swallowed the capitol's propaganda more
easily than the rest of us. embraced their ways. but for all
that, at the end of the day, they were still slaves. and if that
was lost on the citizens who became peacekeepers or
worked in the nut, it was not lost on the stonecutters who
formed the backbone of the resistance here.
things stand as they did when i arrived two weeks
ago. the outer villages are in rebel hands, the town divided,
and the nut is as untouchable as ever. its few entrances
heavily fortified, its heart safely enfolded in the mountain.
while every other district has now wrested control from the
capitol, 2 remains in its pocket.
each day, i do whatever i can to help. visit the
wounded. tape short propos with my camera crew. i'm not
allowed in actual combat, but they invite me to the meetings
on the status of the war, which is a lot more than they did in
13. it's much better here. freer, no schedules on my arm,
fewer demands on my time. i live aboveground in the rebel
villages or surrounding caves. for safety's sake, i'm
relocated often. during the day, i've been given clearance
to hunt as long as i take a guard along and don't stray too
far. in the thin, cold mountain air, i feel some physical
strength returning, my mind clearing away the rest of the
fogginess. but with this mental clarity comes an even
sharper awareness of what has been done to peeta.
snow has stolen him from me, twisted him beyond
recognition, and made me a present of him. boggs, who
came to 2 when i did, told me that even with all the plotting,
it was a little too easy to rescue peeta. he believes if 13
hadn't made the effort, peeta would've been delivered to
me anyway. dropped off in an actively warring district or
perhaps 13 itself. tied up with ribbons and tagged with my
name. programmed to murder me.
it's only now that he's been corrupted that i can fully
appreciate the real peeta. even more than i would've if he'd
died. the kindness, the steadiness, the warmth that had an
unexpected heat behind it. outside of prim, my mother, and
gale, how many people in the world love me
unconditionally? i think in my case, the answer may now be
none. sometimes when i'm alone, i take the pearl from
where it lives in my pocket and try to remember the boy with
the bread, the strong arms that warded off nightmares on
the train, the kisses in the arena. to make myself put a
name to the thing i've lost. but what's the use? it's gone.
he's gone. whatever existed between us is gone. all that's
left is my promise to kill snow. i tell myself this ten times a
day.
back in 13, peeta's rehabilitation continues. even
though i don't ask, plutarch gives me cheerful updates on
the phone like "good news, katniss! i think we've almost
got him convinced you're not a mutt!" or "today he was
allowed to feed himself pudding!"
when haymitch gets on after, he admits peeta's no
better. the only dubious ray of hope has come from my
sister. "prim came up with the idea of trying to hijack him
back," haymitch tells me. "bring up the distorted memories
of you and then give him a big dose of a calming drug, like
morphling. we've only tried it on one memory. the tape of
the two of you in the cave, when you told him that story
about getting prim the goat."
any improvement? i ask.
"well, if extreme confusion is an improvement over
extreme terror, then yes, says haymitch. ""but i'm not sure it"
is. he lost the ability to speak for several hours. went into
some sort of stupor. when he came out, the only thing he
asked about was the goat."
right, i say.
how's it out there? he asks.
no forward motion, i tell him.
"we're sending out a team to help with the mountain.
beetee and some of the others, he says. ""you know, the"
brains."
when the brains are selected, i'm not surprised to see
gale's name on the list. i thought beetee would bring him,
not for his technological expertise, but in the hopes that he
could somehow think of a way to ensnare a mountain.
originally, gale offered to come with me to 2, but i could
see i was tearing him away from his work with beetee. i told
him to sit tight and stay where he was most needed. i didn't
tell him his presence would make it even more difficult for
me to mourn peeta.
gale finds me when they arrive late one afternoon. i'm
sitting on a log at the edge of my current village, plucking a
goose. a dozen or so of the birds are piled at my feet.
great flocks of them have been migrating through here
since i've arrived, and the pickings are easy. without a
word, gale settles beside me and begins to relieve a bird
of its feathers. we're through about half when he says, "any
chance we'll get to eat these?"
"yeah. most go to the camp kitchen, but they expect
me to give a couple to whoever i'm staying with tonight, i"
say. "for keeping me."
isn't the honor of the thing enough? he says.
you'd think, i reply. "but word's gotten out that
mockingjays are hazardous to your health."
we pluck in silence for a while longer. then he says, "i
saw peeta yesterday. through the glass."
what'd you think? i ask.
something selfish, says gale.
that you don't have to be jealous of him anymore?
my fingers give a yank, and a cloud of feathers floats down
around us.
no. just the opposite. gale pulls a feather out of my
hair. "i thought...i'll never compete with that. no matter how
much pain i'm in." he spins the feather between his thumb
and forefinger. "i don't stand a chance if he doesn't get
better. you'll never be able to let him go. you'll always feel
wrong about being with me."
"the way i always felt wrong kissing him because of
you, i say."
gale holds my gaze. "if i thought that was true, i could
almost live with the rest of it."
it is true, i admit. "but so is what you said about
peeta."
gale makes a sound of exasperation. nonetheless,
after we've dropped off the birds and volunteered to go
back to the woods to gather kindling for the evening fire, i
find myself wrapped in his arms. his lips brushing the faded
bruises on my neck, working their way to my mouth.
despite what i feel for peeta, this is when i accept deep
down that he'll never come back to me. or i'll never go back
to him. i'll stay in 2 until it falls, go to the capitol and kill
snow, and then die for my trouble. and he'll die insane and
hating me. so in the fading light i shut my eyes and kiss
gale to make up for all the kisses i've withheld, and
because it doesn't matter anymore, and because i'm so
desperately lonely i can't stand it.
gale's touch and taste and heat remind me that at
least my body's still alive, and for the moment it's a
welcome feeling. i empty my mind and let the sensations
run through my flesh, happy to lose myself. when gale pulls
away slightly, i move forward to close the gap, but i feel his
hand under my chin. "katniss," he says. the instant i open
my eyes, the world seems disjointed. this is not our woods
or our mountains or our way. my hand automatically goes to
the scar on my left temple, which i associate with confusion.
now kiss me. bewildered, unblinking, i stand there while
he leans in and presses his lips to mine briefly. he
examines my face closely. "what's going on in your head?"
i don't know, i whisper back.
"then it's like kissing someone who's drunk. it doesn't
count, he says with a weak attempt at a laugh. he scoops"
up a pile of kindling and drops it in my empty arms,
returning me to myself.
how do you know? i say, mostly to cover my
embarrassment. "have you kissed someone who's drunk?"
i guess gale could've been kissing girls right and left back
in 12. he certainly had enough takers. i never thought about
it much before.
he just shakes his head. "no. but it's not hard to
imagine."
so, you never kissed any other girls? i ask.
"i didn't say that. you know, you were only twelve when
we met. and a real pain besides. i did have a life outside of
hunting with you, he says, loading up with firewood."
suddenly, i'm genuinely curious. "who did you kiss?
and where?"
"too many to remember. behind the school, on the
slag heap, you name it, he says."
i roll my eyes. "so when did i become so special?
when they carted me off to the capitol?"
"no. about six months before that. right after new
year's. we were in the hob, eating some slop of greasy
sae's. and darius was teasing you about trading a rabbit
for one of his kisses. and i realized...i minded, he tells me."
i remember that day. bitter cold and dark by four in the
afternoon. we'd been hunting, but a heavy snow had driven
us back into town. the hob was crowded with people
looking for refuge from the weather. greasy sae's soup,
made with stock from the bones of a wild dog we'd shot a
week earlier, was below her usual standards. still, it was
hot, and i was starving as i scooped it up, sitting crosslegged
on her counter. darius was leaning on the post of
the stall, tickling my cheek with the end of my braid, while i
smacked his hand away. he was explaining why one of his
kisses merited a rabbit, or possibly two, since everyone
knows redheaded men are the most virile. and greasy sae
and i were laughing because he was so ridiculous and
persistent and kept pointing out women around the hob
who he said had paid far more than a rabbit to enjoy his
lips. "see? the one in the green muffler? go ahead and
ask her. if you need a reference."
a million miles from here, a billion days ago, this
happened. "darius was just joking around," i say.
"probably. although you'd be the last to figure out if he
wasn't, gale tells me. ""take peeta. take me. or even"
finnick. i was starting to worry he had his eye on you, but
he seems back on track now."
you don't know finnick if you think he'd love me, i
say.
gale shrugs. "i know he was desperate. that makes
people do all kinds of crazy things."
i can't help thinking that's directed at me.
bright and early the next morning, the brains assemble
to take on the problem of the nut. i'm asked to the meeting,
although i don't have much to contribute. i avoid the
conference table and perch in the wide windowsill that has
a view of the mountain in question. the commander from 2,
a middle-aged woman named lyme, takes us on a virtual
tour of the nut, its interior and fortifications, and recounts
the failed attempts to seize it. i've crossed paths with her
briefly a couple of times since my arrival, and was dogged
by the feeling i'd met her before. she's memorable enough,
standing over six feet tall and heavily muscled. but it's only
when i see a clip of her in the field, leading a raid on the
main entrance of the nut, that something clicks and i realize
i'm in the presence of another victor. lyme, the tribute from
district 2, who won her hunger games over a generation
ago. effie sent us her tape, among others, to prepare for
the quarter quell. i've probably caught glimpses of her
during the games over the years, but she's kept a low
profile. with my newfound knowledge of haymitch's and
finnick's treatment, all i can think is: what did the capitol
do to her after she won?
when lyme finishes the presentation, the questions
from the brains begin. hours pass, and lunch comes and
goes, as they try to come up with a realistic plan for taking
the nut. but while beetee thinks he might be able to
override certain computer systems, and there's some
discussion of putting the handful of internal spies to use, no
one has any really innovative thoughts. as the afternoon
wears on, talk keeps returning to a strategy that has been
tried repeatedly--the storming of the entrances. i can see
lyme's frustration building because so many variations of
this plan have already failed, so many of her soldiers have
been lost. finally, she bursts out, "the next person who
suggests we take the entrances better have a brilliant way
to do it, because you're going to be the one leading that
mission!"
gale, who is too restless to sit at the table for more
than a few hours, has been alternating between pacing and
sharing my windowsill. early on, he seemed to accept
lyme's assertion that the entrances couldn't be taken, and
dropped out of the conversation entirely. for the last hour or
so, he's sat quietly, his brow knitted in concentration,
staring at the nut through the window glass. in the silence
that follows lyme's ultimatum, he speaks up. "is it really so
necessary that we take the nut? or would it be enough to
disable it?"
that would be a step in the right direction, says
beetee. "what do you have in mind?"
think of it as a wild dog den, gale continues. "you're
not going to fight your way in. so you have two choices.
trap the dogs inside or flush them out."
we've tried bombing the entrances, says lyme.
"they're set too far inside the stone for any real damage to
be done."
i wasn't thinking of that, says gale. "i was thinking of
using the mountain." beetee rises and joins gale at the
window, peering through his ill-fitting glasses. "see?
running down the sides?"
avalanche paths, says beetee under his breath. "it'd
be tricky. we'd have to design the detonation sequence
with great care, and once it's in motion, we couldn't hope to
control it."
"we don't need to control it if we give up the idea that
we have to possess the nut, says gale. ""only shut it"
down."
"so you're suggesting we start avalanches and block
the entrances? asks lyme."
that's it, says gale. "trap the enemy inside, cut off
from supplies. make it impossible for them to send out their
hovercraft."
while everyone considers the plan, boggs flips
through a stack of blueprints of the nut and frowns. "you
risk killing everyone inside. look at the ventilation system.
it's rudimentary at best. nothing like what we have in
thirteen. it depends entirely on pumping in air from the
mountainsides. block those vents and you'll suffocate
whoever is trapped."
"they could still escape through the train tunnel to the
square, says beetee."
not if we blow it up, says gale brusquely. his intent,
his full intent, becomes clear. gale has no interest in
preserving the lives of those in the nut. no interest in
caging the prey for later use.
this is one of his death traps.
15
the implications of what gale is suggesting settle
quietly around the room. you can see the reaction playing
out on people's faces. the expressions range from
pleasure to distress, from sorrow to satisfaction.
the majority of the workers are citizens from two,
says beetee neutrally.
so what? says gale. "we'll never be able to trust
them again."
they should at least have a chance to surrender,
says lyme.
"well, that's a luxury we weren't given when they firebombed
twelve, but you're all so much cozier with the
capitol here, says gale. by the look on lyme's face, i think"
she might shoot him, or at least take a swing. she'd
probably have the upper hand, too, with all her training. but
her anger only seems to infuriate him and he yells, "we
watched children burn to death and there was nothing we
could do!"
i have to close my eyes a minute, as the image rips
through me. it has the desired effect. i want everyone in that
mountain dead. am about to say so. but then...i'm also a
girl from district 12. not president snow. i can't help it. i
can't condemn someone to the death he's suggesting.
gale, i say, taking his arm and trying to speak in a
reasonable tone. "the nut's an old mine. it'd be like
causing a massive coal mining accident." surely the words
are enough to make anyone from 12 think twice about the
plan.
but not so quick as the one that killed our fathers, he
retorts. "is that everyone's problem? that our enemies
might have a few hours to reflect on the fact that they're
dying, instead of just being blown to bits?"
back in the old days, when we were nothing more than
a couple of kids hunting outside of 12, gale said things like
this and worse. but then they were just words. here, put into
practice, they become deeds that can never be reversed.
"you don't know how those district two people ended
up in the nut, i say. ""they may have been coerced. they"
may be held against their will. some are our own spies. will
you kill them, too?"
"i would sacrifice a few, yes, to take out the rest of
them, he replies. ""and if i were a spy in there, i'd say,"
'bring on the avalanches!'"
i know he's telling the truth. that gale would sacrifice
his life in this way for the cause--no one doubts it. perhaps
we'd all do the same if we were the spies and given the
choice. i guess i would. but it's a coldhearted decision to
make for other people and those who love them.
you said we had two choices, boggs tells him. "to
trap them or to flush them out. i say we try to avalanche the
mountain but leave the train tunnel alone. people can
escape into the square, where we'll be waiting for them."
heavily armed, i hope, says gale. "you can be sure
they'll be."
heavily armed. we'll take them prisoner, agrees
boggs.
let's bring thirteen into the loop now, beetee
suggests. "let president coin weigh in."
she'll want to block the tunnel, says gale with
conviction.
"yes, most likely. but you know, peeta did have a point
in his propos. about the dangers of killing ourselves off. i've
been playing with some numbers. factoring in the
casualties and the wounded and...i think it's at least worth a
conversation, says beetee."
only a handful of people are invited to be part of that
conversation. gale and i are released with the rest. i take
him hunting so he can blow off some steam, but he's not
talking about it. probably too angry with me for countering
him.
the call does happen, a decision is made, and by
evening i'm suited up in my mockingjay outfit, with my bow
slung over my shoulder and an earpiece that connects me
to haymitch in 13--just in case a good opportunity for a
propo arises. we wait on the roof of the justice building
with a clear view of our target.
our hoverplanes are initially ignored by the
commanders in the nut, because in the past they've been
little more trouble than flies buzzing around a honeypot. but
after two rounds of bombings in the higher elevations of the
mountain, the planes have their attention. by the time the
capitol's antiaircraft weapons begin to fire, it's already too
late.
gale's plan exceeds anyone's expectations. beetee
was right about being unable to control the avalanches
once they'd been set in motion. the mountainsides are
naturally unstable, but weakened by the explosions, they
seem almost fluid. whole sections of the nut collapse
before our eyes, obliterating any sign that human beings
have ever set foot on the place. we stand speechless, tiny
and insignificant, as waves of stone thunder down the
mountain. burying the entrances under tons of rock. raising
a cloud of dirt and debris that blackens the sky. turning the
nut into a tomb.
i imagine the hell inside the mountain. sirens wailing.
lights flickering into darkness. stone dust choking the air.
the shrieks of panicked, trapped beings stumbling madly
for a way out, only to find the entrances, the launchpad, the
ventilation shafts themselves clogged with earth and rock
trying to force its way in. live wires flung free, fires breaking
out, rubble making a familiar path a maze. people
slamming, shoving, scrambling like ants as the hill presses
in, threatening to crush their fragile shells.
katniss? haymitch's voice is in my earpiece. i try to
answer back and find both of my hands are clamped tightly
over my mouth. "katniss!"
on the day my father died, the sirens went off during
my school lunch. no one waited for dismissal, or was
expected to. the response to a mine accident was
something outside the control of even the capitol. i ran to
prim's class. i still remember her, tiny at seven, very pale,
but sitting straight up with her hands folded on her desk.
waiting for me to collect her as i'd promised i would if the
sirens ever sounded. she sprang out of her seat, grabbed
my coat sleeve, and we wove through the streams of
people pouring out onto the streets to pool at the main
entrance of the mine. we found our mother clenching the
rope that had been hastily strung to keep the crowd back. in
retrospect, i guess i should have known there was a
problem right then. because why were we looking for her,
when the reverse should have been true?
the elevators were screeching, burning up and down
their cables as they vomited smoke-blackened miners into
the light of day. with each group came cries of relief,
relatives diving under the rope to lead off their husbands,
wives, children, parents, siblings. we stood in the freezing
air as the afternoon turned overcast, a light snow dusted the
earth. the elevators moved more slowly now and
disgorged fewer beings. i knelt on the ground and pressed
my hands into the cinders, wanting so badly to pull my
father free. if there's a more helpless feeling than trying to
reach someone you love who's trapped underground, i don't
know it. the wounded. the bodies. the waiting through the
night. blankets put around your shoulders by strangers. a
mug of something hot that you don't drink. and then finally,
at dawn, the grieved expression on the face of the mine
captain that could only mean one thing.
what did we just do?
katniss! are you there? haymitch is probably
making plans to have me fitted for a head shackle at this
very moment.
i drop my hands. "yes."
"get inside. just in case the capitol tries to retaliate
with what's left of its air force, he instructs."
yes, i repeat. everyone on the roof, except for the
soldiers manning the machine guns, begin to make their
way inside. as i descend the stairs, i can't help brushing my
fingers along the unblemished white marble walls. so cold
and beautiful. even in the capitol, there's nothing to match
the magnificence of this old building. but there is no give to
the surface--only my flesh yields, my warmth taken. stone
conquers people every time.
i sit at the base of one of the gigantic pillars in the
great entrance hall. through the doors i can see the white
expanse of marble that leads to the steps on the square. i
remember how sick i was the day peeta and i accepted
congratulations there for winning the games. worn down by
the victory tour, failing in my attempt to calm the districts,
facing the memories of clove and cato, particularly cato's
gruesome, slow death by mutts.
boggs crouches down beside me, his skin pale in the
shadows. "we didn't bomb the train tunnel, you know.
some of them will probably get out."
"and then we'll shoot them when they show their
faces? i ask."
only if we have to, he answers.
"we could send in trains ourselves. help evacuate the
wounded, i say."
"no. it was decided to leave the tunnel in their hands.
that way they can use all the tracks to bring people out,"
says boggs. "besides, it will give us time to get the rest of
our soldiers to the square."
a few hours ago, the square was a no-man's-land, the
front line of the fight between the rebels and the
peacekeepers. when coin gave approval for gale's plan,
the rebels launched a heated attack and drove the capitol
forces back several blocks so that we would control the
train station in the event that the nut fell. well, it's fallen. the
reality has sunk in. any survivors will escape to the square. i
can hear the gunfire starting again, as the peacekeepers
are no doubt trying to fight their way in to rescue their
comrades. our own soldiers are being brought in to counter
this.
you're cold, says boggs. "i'll see if i can find a
blanket." he goes before i can protest. i don't want a
blanket, even if the marble continues to leech my body heat.
katniss, says haymitch in my ear.
still here, i answer.
"interesting turn of events with peeta this afternoon.
thought you'd want to know, he says. interesting isn't"
good. it isn't better. but i don't really have any choice but to
listen. "we showed him that clip of you singing 'the
hanging tree.' it was never aired, so the capitol couldn't
use it when he was being hijacked. he says he recognized
the song."
for a moment, my heart skips a beat. then i realize it's
just more tracker jacker serum confusion. "he couldn't,
haymitch. he never heard me sing that song."
"not you. your father. he heard him singing it one day
when he came to trade at the bakery. peeta was small,
probably six or seven, but he remembered it because he
was specially listening to see if the birds stopped singing,"
says haymitch. "guess they did."
six or seven. that would have been before my mother
banned the song. maybe even right around the time i was
learning it. "was i there, too?"
"don't think so. no mention of you anyway. but it's the
first connection to you that hasn't triggered some mental
meltdown, says haymitch. ""it's something, at least,"
katniss."
my father. he seems to be everywhere today. dying in
the mine. singing his way into peeta's muddled
consciousness. flickering in the look boggs gives me as
he protectively wraps the blanket around my shoulders. i
miss him so badly it hurts.
the gunfire's really picking up outside. gale hurries by
with a group of rebels, eagerly headed for the battle. i don't
petition to join the fighters, not that they would let me. i have
no stomach for it anyway, no heat in my blood. i wish peeta
was here--the old peeta--because he would be able to
articulate why it is so wrong to be exchanging fire when
people, any people, are trying to claw their way out of the
mountain. or is my own history making me too sensitive?
aren't we at war? isn't this just another way to kill our
enemies?
night falls quickly. huge, bright spotlights are turned
on, illuminating the square. every bulb must be burning at
full wattage inside the train station as well. even from my
position across the square, i can see clearly through the
plate-glass front of the long, narrow building. it would be
impossible to miss the arrival of a train, or even a single
person. but hours pass and no one comes. with each
minute, it becomes harder to imagine that anyone survived
the assault on the nut.
it's well after midnight when cressida comes to attach
a special microphone to my costume. "what's this for?" i
ask.
haymitch's voice comes on to explain. "i know you're
not going to like this, but we need you to make a speech."
a speech? i say, immediately feeling queasy.
i'll feed it to you, line by line, he assures me. "you'll
just have to repeat what i say. look, there's no sign of life
from that mountain. we've won, but the fighting's continuing.
so we thought if you went out on the steps of the justice
building and laid it out--told everybody that the nut's
defeated, that the capitol's presence in district two is
finished--you might be able to get the rest of their forces to
surrender."
i peer at the darkness beyond the square. "i can't even
see their forces."
that's what the mike's for, he says. "you'll be
broadcast, both your voice through their emergency audio
system, and your image wherever people have access to a
screen."
i know there are a couple of huge screens here on the
square. i saw them on the victory tour. it might work, if i
were good at this sort of thing. which i'm not. they tried to
feed me lines in those early experiments with the propos,
too, and it was a flop.
you could save a lot of lives, katniss, haymitch says
finally.
all right. i'll give it a try, i tell him.
it's strange standing outside at the top of the stairs,
fully costumed, brightly lit, but with no visible audience to
deliver my speech to. like i'm doing a show for the moon.
let's make this quick, says haymitch. "you're too
exposed."
my television crew, positioned out in the square with
special cameras, indicates that they're ready. i tell
haymitch to go ahead, then click on my mike and listen
carefully to him dictate the first line of the speech. a huge
image of me lights up one of the screens over the square
as i begin. "people of district two, this is katniss
everdeen speaking to you from the steps of your justice
building, where--"
the pair of trains comes screeching into the train
station side by side. as the doors slide open, people
tumble out in a cloud of smoke they've brought from the nut.
they must have had at least an inkling of what would await
them at the square, because you can see them trying to act
evasively. most of them flatten on the floor, and a spray of
bullets inside the station takes out the lights. they've come
armed, as gale predicted, but they've come wounded as
well. the moans can be heard in the otherwise silent night
air.
someone kills the lights on the stairs, leaving me in the
protection of shadow. a flame blooms inside the station--
one of the trains must actually be on fire--and a thick, black
smoke billows against the windows. left with no choice, the
people begin to push out into the square, choking but
defiantly waving their guns. my eyes dart around the
rooftops that ring the square. every one of them has been
fortified with rebel-manned machine gun nests. moonlight
glints off oiled barrels.
a young man staggers out from the station, one hand
pressed against a bloody cloth at his cheek, the other
dragging a gun. when he trips and falls to his face, i see
the scorch marks down the back of his shirt, the red flesh
beneath. and suddenly, he's just another burn victim from a
mine accident.
my feet fly down the steps and i take off running for
him. "stop!" i yell at the rebels. "hold your fire!" the words
echo around the square and beyond as the mike amplifies
my voice. "stop!" i'm nearing the young man, reaching
down to help him, when he drags himself up to his knees
and trains his gun on my head.
i instinctively back up a few steps, raise my bow over
my head to show my intention was harmless. now that he
has both hands on his gun, i notice the ragged hole in his
cheek where something--falling stone maybe--punctured
the flesh. he smells of burning things, hair and meat and
fuel. his eyes are crazed with pain and fear.
freeze, haymitch's voice whispers in my ear. i follow
his order, realizing that this is what all of district 2, all of
panem maybe, must be seeing at the moment. the
mockingjay at the mercy of a man with nothing to lose.
his garbled speech is barely comprehensible. "give
me one reason i shouldn't shoot you."
the rest of the world recedes. there's only me looking
into the wretched eyes of the man from the nut who asks for
one reason. surely i should be able to come up with
thousands. but the words that make it to my lips are "i
can't."
logically, the next thing that should happen is the man
pulling the trigger. but he's perplexed, trying to make sense
of my words. i experience my own confusion as i realize
what i've said is entirely true, and the noble impulse that
carried me across the square is replaced by despair. "i
can't. that's the problem, isn't it?" i lower my bow. "we blew
up your mine. you burned my district to the ground. we've
got every reason to kill each other. so do it. make the
capitol happy. i'm done killing their slaves for them." i drop
my bow on the ground and give it a nudge with my boot. it
slides across the stone and comes to rest at his knees.
i'm not their slave, the man mutters.
i am, i say. "that's why i killed cato...and he killed
thresh...and he killed clove...and she tried to kill me. it just
goes around and around, and who wins? not us. not the
districts. always the capitol. but i'm tired of being a piece
in their games."
peeta. on the rooftop the night before our first hunger
games. he understood it all before we'd even set foot in
the arena. i hope he's watching now, that he remembers
that night as it happened, and maybe forgives me when i
die.
"keep talking. tell them about watching the mountain
go down, haymitch insists."
"when i saw that mountain fall tonight, i
thought...they've done it again. got me to kill you--the
people in the districts. but why did i do it? district twelve
and district two have no fight except the one the capitol
gave us. the young man blinks at me uncomprehendingly."
i sink on my knees before him, my voice low and urgent.
"and why are you fighting with the rebels on the rooftops?
with lyme, who was your victor? with people who were
your neighbors, maybe even your family?"
i don't know, says the man. but he doesn't take his
gun off me.
i rise and turn slowly in a circle, addressing the
machine guns. "and you up there? i come from a mining
town. since when do miners condemn other miners to that
kind of death, and then stand by to kill whoever manages to
crawl from the rubble?"
who is the enemy? whispers haymitch.
these people--i indicate the wounded bodies on the
square--"are not your enemy!" i whip back around to the
train station. "the rebels are not your enemy! we all have
one enemy, and it's the capitol! this is our chance to put
an end to their power, but we need every district person to
do it!" the cameras are tight on me as i reach out my hands
to the man, to the wounded, to the reluctant rebels across
panem. "please! join us!"
my words hang in the air. i look to the screen, hoping to
see them recording some wave of reconciliation going
through the crowd.
instead i watch myself get shot on television.
16
always.
in the twilight of morphling, peeta whispers the word
and i go searching for him. it's a gauzy, violet-tinted world,
with no hard edges, and many places to hide. i push
through cloud banks, follow faint tracks, catch the scent of
cinnamon, of dill. once i feel his hand on my cheek and try
to trap it, but it dissolves like mist through my fingers.
when i finally begin to surface into the sterile hospital
room in 13, i remember. i was under the influence of sleep
syrup. my heel had been injured after i'd climbed out on a
branch over the electric fence and dropped back into 12.
peeta had put me to bed and i had asked him to stay with
me as i was drifting off. he had whispered something i
couldn't quite catch. but some part of my brain had trapped
his single word of reply and let it swim up through my
dreams to taunt me now. "always."
morphling dulls the extremes of all emotions, so
instead of a stab of sorrow, i merely feel emptiness. a
hollow of dead brush where flowers used to bloom.
unfortunately, there's not enough of the drug left in my veins
for me to ignore the pain in the left side of my body. that's
where the bullet hit. my hands fumble over the thick
bandages encasing my ribs and i wonder what i'm still
doing here.
it wasn't him, the man kneeling before me on the
square, the burned one from the nut. he didn't pull the
trigger. it was someone farther back in the crowd. there
was less a sense of penetration than the feeling that i'd
been struck with a sledgehammer. everything after the
moment of impact is confusion riddled with gunfire. i try to
sit up, but the only thing i manage is a moan.
the white curtain that divides my bed from the next
patient's whips back, and johanna mason stares down at
me. at first i feel threatened, because she attacked me in
the arena. i have to remind myself that she did it to save my
life. it was part of the rebel plot. but still, that doesn't mean
she doesn't despise me. maybe her treatment of me was
all an act for the capitol?
i'm alive, i say rustily.
no kidding, brainless. johanna walks over and
plunks down on my bed, sending spikes of pain shooting
across my chest. when she grins at my discomfort, i know
we're not in for some warm reunion scene. "still a little
sore?" with an expert hand, she quickly detaches the
morphling drip from my arm and plugs it into a socket taped
into the crook of her own. "they started cutting back my
supply a few days ago. afraid i'm going to turn into one of
those freaks from six. i've had to borrow from you when the
coast was clear. didn't think you'd mind."
mind? how can i mind when she was almost tortured
to death by snow after the quarter quell? i have no right to
mind, and she knows it.
johanna sighs as the morphling enters her
bloodstream. "maybe they were onto something in six.
drug yourself out and paint flowers on your body. not such
a bad life. seemed happier than the rest of us, anyway."
in the weeks since i left 13, she's gained some weight
back. a soft down of hair has sprouted on her shaved head,
helping to hide some of the scars. but if she's siphoning off
my morphling, she's struggling.
"they've got this head doctor who comes around every
day. supposed to be helping me recover. like some guy
who's spent his life in this rabbit warren's going to fix me
up. complete idiot. at least twenty times a session he
reminds me that i'm totally safe. i manage a smile. it's a"
truly stupid thing to say, especially to a victor. as if such a
state of being ever existed, anywhere, for anyone. "how
about you, mockingjay? you feel totally safe?"
oh, yeah. right up until i got shot, i say.
"please. that bullet never even touched you. cinna
saw to that, she says."
i think of the layers of protective armor in my
mockingjay outfit. but the pain came from somewhere.
broken ribs?
"not even. bruised pretty good. the impact ruptured
your spleen. they couldn't repair it. she gives a dismissive"
wave of her hand. "don't worry, you don't need one. and if
you did, they'd find you one, wouldn't they? it's everybody's
job to keep you alive."
is that why you hate me? i ask.
partly, she admits. "jealousy is certainly involved. i
also think you're a little hard to swallow. with your tacky
romantic drama and your defender-of-the-helpless act. only
it isn't an act, which makes you more unbearable. please
feel free to take this personally."
"you should have been the mockingjay. no one
would've had to feed you lines, i say."
true. but no one likes me, she tells me.
they trusted you, though. to get me out, i remind her.
and they're afraid of you.
"here, maybe. in the capitol, you're the one they're
scared of now. gale appears in the doorway, and johanna"
neatly unhooks herself and reattaches me to the morphling
drip. "your cousin's not afraid of me," she says
confidentially. she scoots off my bed and crosses to the
door, nudging gale's leg with her hip as she passes him.
are you, gorgeous? we can hear her laughter as she
disappears down the hall.
i raise my eyebrows at him as he takes my hand.
terrified, he mouths. i laugh, but it turns into a wince.
easy. he strokes my face as the pain ebbs. "you've got
to stop running straight into trouble."
i know. but someone blew up a mountain, i answer.
instead of pulling back, he leans in closer, searching
my face. "you think i'm heartless."
i know you're not. but i won't tell you it's okay, i say.
now he draws back, almost impatiently. "katniss, what
difference is there, really, between crushing our enemy in a
mine or blowing them out of the sky with one of beetee's
arrows? the result is the same."
"i don't know. we were under attack in eight, for one
thing. the hospital was under attack, i say."
yes, and those hoverplanes came from district two,
he says. "so, by taking them out, we prevented further
attacks."
"but that kind of thinking...you could turn it into an
argument for killing anyone at any time. you could justify
sending kids into the hunger games to prevent the districts
from getting out of line, i say."
i don't buy that, he tells me.
i do, i reply. "it must be those trips to the arena."
fine. we know how to disagree, he says. "we
always have. maybe it's good. between you and me, we've
got district two now."
really? for a moment a feeling of triumph flares up
inside me. then i think about the people on the square.
was there fighting after i was shot?
"not much. the workers from the nut turned on the
capitol soldiers. the rebels just sat by and watched, he"
says. "actually, the whole country just sat by and watched."
well, that's what they do best, i say.
you'd think that losing a major organ would entitle you
to lie around a few weeks, but for some reason, my doctors
want me up and moving almost immediately. even with the
morphling, the internal pain's severe the first few days, but
then it slacks off considerably. the soreness from the
bruised ribs, however, promises to hang on for a while. i
begin to resent johanna dipping into my morphling supply,
but i still let her take whatever she likes.
rumors of my death have been running rampant, so
they send in the team to film me in my hospital bed. i show
off my stitches and impressive bruising and congratulate
the districts on their successful battle for unity. then i warn
the capitol to expect us soon.
as part of my rehabilitation, i take short walks
aboveground each day. one afternoon, plutarch joins me
and gives me an update on our current situation. now that
district 2 has allied with us, the rebels are taking a breather
from the war to regroup. fortifying supply lines, seeing to
the wounded, reorganizing their troops. the capitol, like 13
during the dark days, finds itself completely cut off from
outside help as it holds the threat of nuclear attack over its
enemies. unlike 13, the capitol is not in a position to
reinvent itself and become self-sufficient.
oh, the city might be able to scrape along for a while,
says plutarch. "certainly, there are emergency supplies
stockpiled. but the significant difference between thirteen
and the capitol are the expectations of the populace.
thirteen was used to hardship, whereas in the capitol, all
they've known is panem et circenses."
what's that? i recognize panem, of course, but the
rest is nonsense.
"it's a saying from thousands of years ago, written in a
language called latin about a place called rome, he"
explains. "panem et circenses translates into 'bread and
circuses.' the writer was saying that in return for full bellies
and entertainment, his people had given up their political
responsibilities and therefore their power."
i think about the capitol. the excess of food. and the
ultimate entertainment. the hunger games. "so that's what
the districts are for. to provide the bread and circuses."
"yes. and as long as that kept rolling in, the capitol
could control its little empire. right now, it can provide
neither, at least at the standard the people are accustomed
to, says plutarch. ""we have the food and i'm about to"
orchestrate an entertainment propo that's sure to be
popular. after all, everybody loves a wedding."
i freeze in my tracks, sick at the idea of what he's
suggesting. somehow staging some perverse wedding
between peeta and me. i haven't been able to face that
one-way glass since i've been back and, at my own
request, only get updates about peeta's condition from
haymitch. he speaks very little about it. different
techniques are being tried. there will never truly be a way
to cure him. and now they want me to marry peeta for a
propo?
plutarch rushes to reassure me. "oh, no, katniss. not
your wedding. finnick and annie's. all you need to do is
show up and pretend to be happy for them."
"that's one of the few things i won't have to pretend,
plutarch, i tell him."
the next few days bring a flurry of activity as the event
is planned. the differences between the capitol and 13 are
thrown into sharp relief by the event. when coin says
wedding, she means two people signing a piece of paper
and being assigned a new compartment. plutarch means
hundreds of people dressed in finery at a three-day
celebration. it's amusing to watch them haggle over the
details. plutarch has to fight for every guest, every musical
note. after coin vetoes a dinner, entertainment, and
alcohol, plutarch yells, "what's the point of the propo if no
one's having any fun!"
it's hard to put a gamemaker on a budget. but even a
quiet celebration causes a stir in 13, where they seem to
have no holidays at all. when it's announced that children
are wanted to sing district 4's wedding song, practically
every kid shows up. there's no shortage of volunteers to
help make decorations. in the dining hall, people chat
excitedly about the event.
maybe it's more than the festivities. maybe it's that we
are all so starved for something good to happen that we
want to be part of it. it would explain why--when plutarch has
a fit over what the bride will wear--i volunteer to take annie
back to my house in 12, where cinna left a variety of
evening clothes in a big storage closet downstairs. all of
the wedding gowns he designed for me went back to the
capitol, but there are some dresses i wore on the victory
tour. i'm a little leery about being with annie since all i really
know about her is that finnick loves her and everybody
thinks she's mad. on the hovercraft ride, i decide she's less
mad than unstable. she laughs at odd places in the
conversation or drops out of it distractedly. those green
eyes fixate on a point with such intensity that you find
yourself trying to make out what she sees in the empty air.
sometimes, for no reason, she presses both her hands
over her ears as if to block out a painful sound. all right,
she's strange, but if finnick loves her, that's good enough
for me.
i got permission for my prep team to come along, so
i'm relieved of having to make any fashion decisions. when
i open the closet, we all fall silent because cinna's
presence is so strong in the flow of the fabrics. then
octavia drops to her knees, rubs the hem of a skirt against
her cheek, and bursts into tears. "it's been so long," she
gasps, "since i've seen anything pretty."
despite reservations on coin's side that it's too
extravagant, and on plutarch's side that it's too drab, the
wedding is a smash hit. the three hundred lucky guests
culled from 13 and the many refugees wear their everyday
clothes, the decorations are made from autumn foliage, the
music is provided by a choir of children accompanied by
the lone fiddler who made it out of 12 with his instrument.
so it's simple, frugal by the capitol's standards. it doesn't
matter because nothing can compete with the beauty of the
couple. it isn't about their borrowed finery--annie wears a
green silk dress i wore in 5, finnick one of peeta's suits
that they altered--although the clothes are striking. who can
look past the radiant faces of two people for whom this day
was once a virtual impossibility? dalton, the cattle guy from
10, conducts the ceremony, since it's similar to the one
used in his district. but there are unique touches of district
4. a net woven from long grass that covers the couple
during their vows, the touching of each other's lips with salt
water, and the ancient wedding song, which likens
marriage to a sea voyage.
no, i don't have to pretend to be happy for them.
after the kiss that seals the union, the cheers, and a
toast with apple cider, the fiddler strikes up a tune that turns
every head from 12. we may have been the smallest,
poorest district in panem, but we know how to dance.
nothing has been officially scheduled at this point, but
plutarch, who's calling the propo from the control room,
must have his fingers crossed. sure enough, greasy sae
grabs gale by the hand and pulls him into the center of the
floor and faces off with him. people pour in to join them,
forming two long lines. and the dancing begins.
i'm standing off to the side, clapping to the rhythm,
when a bony hand pinches me above the elbow. johanna
scowls at me. "are you going to miss the chance to let
snow see you dancing?" she's right. what could spell
victory louder than a happy mockingjay twirling around to
music? i find prim in the crowd. since winter evenings gave
us a lot of time to practice, we're actually pretty good
partners. i brush off her concerns about my ribs, and we
take our places in the line. it hurts, but the satisfaction of
having snow watch me dance with my little sister reduces
other feelings to dust.
dancing transforms us. we teach the steps to the
district 13 guests. insist on a special number for the bride
and groom. join hands and make a giant, spinning circle
where people show off their footwork. nothing silly, joyful, or
fun has happened in so long. this could go on all night if not
for the last event planned in plutarch's propo. one i hadn't
heard about, but then it was meant to be a surprise.
four people wheel out a huge wedding cake from a
side room. most of the guests back up, making way for this
rarity, this dazzling creation with blue-green, white-tipped
icing waves swimming with fish and sailboats, seals and
sea flowers. but i push my way through the crowd to confirm
what i knew at first sight. as surely as the embroidery
stitches in annie's gown were done by cinna's hand, the
frosted flowers on the cake were done by peeta's.
this may seem like a small thing, but it speaks
volumes. haymitch has been keeping a great deal from
me. the boy i last saw, screaming his head off, trying to
tear free of his restraints, could never have made this.
never have had the focus, kept his hands steady, designed
something so perfect for finnick and annie. as if
anticipating my reaction, haymitch is at my side.
let's you and me have a talk, he says.
out in the hall, away from the cameras, i ask, "what's
happening to him?"
haymitch shakes his head. "i don't know. none of us
knows. sometimes he's almost rational, and then, for no
reason, he goes off again. doing the cake was a kind of
therapy. he's been working on it for days. watching
him...he seemed almost like before."
so, he's got the run of the place? i ask. the idea
makes me nervous on about five different levels.
"oh, no. he frosted under heavy guard. he's still under
lock and key. but i've talked to him, haymitch says."
face-to-face? i ask. "and he didn't go nuts?"
"no. pretty angry with me, but for all the right reasons.
not telling him about the rebel plot and whatnot. haymitch"
pauses a moment, as if deciding something. "he says he'd
like to see you."
i'm on a frosting sailboat, tossed around by blue-green
waves, the deck shifting beneath my feet. my palms press
into the wall to steady myself. this wasn't part of the plan. i
wrote peeta off in 2. then i was to go to the capitol, kill
snow, and get taken out myself. the gunshot was only a
temporary setback. never was i supposed to hear the
words he says he'd like to see you. but now that i have,
there's no way to refuse.
at midnight, i'm standing outside the door to his cell.
hospital room. we had to wait for plutarch to finish getting
his wedding footage, which, despite the lack of what he
calls razzle-dazzle, he's pleased with. "the best thing about
the capitol basically ignoring twelve all these years is that
you people still have a little spontaneity. the audience eats
that up. like when peeta announced he was in love with
you or you did the trick with the berries. makes for good
television."
i wish i could meet with peeta privately. but the
audience of doctors has assembled behind the one-way
glass, clipboards ready, pens poised. when haymitch
gives me the okay in my earpiece, i slowly open the door.
those blue eyes lock on me instantly. he's got three
restraints on each arm, and a tube that can dispense a
knockout drug just in case he loses control. he doesn't fight
to free himself, though, only observes me with the wary look
of someone who still hasn't ruled out that he's in the
presence of a mutt. i walk over until i'm standing about a
yard from the bed. there's nothing to do with my hands, so i
cross my arms protectively over my ribs before i speak.
hey.
hey, he responds. it's like his voice, almost his voice,
except there's something new in it. an edge of suspicion
and reproach.
haymitch said you wanted to talk to me, i say.
look at you, for starters. it's like he's waiting for me
to transform into a hybrid drooling wolf right before his
eyes. he stares so long i find myself casting furtive glances
at the one-way glass, hoping for some direction from
haymitch, but my earpiece stays silent. "you're not very big,
are you? or particularly pretty?"
i know he's been through hell and back, and yet
somehow the observation rubs me the wrong way. "well,
you've looked better."
haymitch's advice to back off gets muffled by peeta's
laughter. "and not even remotely nice. to say that to me
after all i've been through."
"yeah. we've all been through a lot. and you're the one
who was known for being nice. not me. i'm doing"
everything wrong. i don't know why i feel so defensive. he's
been tortured! he's been hijacked! what's wrong with me?
suddenly, i think i might start screaming at him--i'm not even
sure about what--so i decide to get out of there. "look, i
don't feel so well. maybe i'll drop by tomorrow."
i've just reached the door when his voice stops me.
katniss. i remember about the bread.
the bread. our one moment of real connection before
the hunger games.
they showed you the tape of me talking about it, i
say.
"no. is there a tape of you talking about it? why didn't
the capitol use it against me? he asks."
i made it the day you were rescued, i answer. the
pain in my chest wraps around my ribs like a vise. the
dancing was a mistake. "so what do you remember?"
you. in the rain, he says softly. "digging in our trash
bins. burning the bread. my mother hitting me. taking the
bread out for the pig but then giving it to you instead."
that's it. that's what happened, i say. "the next day,
after school, i wanted to thank you. but i didn't know how."
"we were outside at the end of the day. i tried to catch
your eye. you looked away. and then...for some reason, i
think you picked a dandelion. i nod. he does remember. i"
have never spoken about that moment aloud. "i must have
loved you a lot."
you did. my voice catches and i pretend to cough.
and did you love me? he asks.
i keep my eyes on the tiled floor. "everyone says i did.
everyone says that's why snow had you tortured. to break
me."
that's not an answer, he tells me. "i don't know what
to think when they show me some of the tapes. in that first
arena, it looked like you tried to kill me with those tracker
jackers."
i was trying to kill all of you, i say. "you had me treed."
"later, there's a lot of kissing. didn't seem very
genuine on your part. did you like kissing me? he asks."
sometimes, i admit. "you know people are watching
us now?"
i know. what about gale? he continues.
my anger's returning. i don't care about his recovery--
this isn't the business of the people behind the glass. "he's
not a bad kisser either," i say shortly.
"and it was okay with both of us? you kissing the
other? he asks."
"no. it wasn't okay with either of you. but i wasn't
asking your permission, i tell him."
peeta laughs again, coldly, dismissively. "well, you're
a piece of work, aren't you?"
haymitch doesn't protest when i walk out. down the
hall. through the beehive of compartments. find a warm
pipe to hide behind in a laundry room. it takes a long time
before i get to the bottom of why i'm so upset. when i do,
it's almost too mortifying to admit. all those months of
taking it for granted that peeta thought i was wonderful are
over. finally, he can see me for who i really am. violent.
distrustful. manipulative. deadly.
and i hate him for it.
17
blindsided. that's how i feel when haymitch tells me in
the hospital. i fly down the steps to command, mind racing
a mile a minute, and burst right into a war meeting.
"what do you mean, i'm not going to the capitol? i
have to go! i'm the mockingjay! i say."
coin barely looks up from her screen. "and as the
mockingjay, your primary goal of unifying the districts
against the capitol has been achieved. don't worry--if it
goes well, we'll fly you in for the surrender."
the surrender?
"that'll be too late! i'll miss all the fighting. you need
me--i'm the best shot you've got! i shout. i don't usually"
brag about this, but it's got to be at least close to true.
gale's going.
"gale has shown up for training every day unless
occupied with other approved duties. we feel confident he
can manage himself in the field, says coin. ""how many"
training sessions do you estimate you've attended?"
none. that's how many. "well, sometimes i was
hunting. and...i trained with beetee down in special
weaponry."
it's not the same, katniss, says boggs. "we all know
you're smart and brave and a good shot. but we need
soldiers in the field. you don't know the first thing about
executing orders, and you're not exactly at your physical
peak."
"that didn't bother you when i was in eight. or two, for
that matter, i counter."
"you weren't originally authorized for combat in either
case, says plutarch, shooting me a look that signals i'm"
about to reveal too much.
no, the bomber battle in 8 and my intervention in 2
were spontaneous, rash, and definitely unauthorized.
and both resulted in your injury, boggs reminds me.
suddenly, i see myself through his eyes. a smallish
seventeen-year-old girl who can't quite catch her breath
since her ribs haven't fully healed. disheveled.
undisciplined. recuperating. not a soldier, but someone
who needs to be looked after.
but i have to go, i say.
why? asks coin.
i can't very well say it's so i can carry out my own
personal vendetta against snow. or that the idea of
remaining here in 13 with the latest version of peeta while
gale goes off to fight is unbearable. but i have no shortage
of reasons to want to fight in the capitol. "because of
twelve. because they destroyed my district."
the president thinks about this a moment. considers
me. "well, you have three weeks. it's not long, but you can
begin training. if the assignment board deems you fit,
possibly your case will be reviewed."
that's it. that's the most i can hope for. i guess it's my
own fault. i did blow off my schedule every single day unless
something suited me. it didn't seem like much of a priority,
jogging around a field with a gun with so many other things
going on. and now i'm paying for my negligence.
back in the hospital, i find johanna in the same
circumstance and spitting mad. i tell her about what coin
said. "maybe you can train, too."
"fine. i'll train. but i'm going to the stinking capitol if i
have to kill a crew and fly there myself, says johanna."
probably best not to bring that up in training, i say.
but it's nice to know i'll have a ride.
johanna grins, and i feel a slight but significant shift in
our relationship. i don't know that we're actually friends, but
possibly the word allies would be accurate. that's good. i'm
going to need an ally.
the next morning, when we report for training at 7:30,
reality slaps me in the face. we've been funneled into a
class of relative beginners, fourteen- or fifteen-year-olds,
which seems a little insulting until it's obvious that they're in
far better condition than we are. gale and the other people
already chosen to go to the capitol are in a different,
accelerated phase of training. after we stretch--which hurts-
-there's a couple of hours of strengthening exercises--which
hurt--and a five-mile run--which kills. even with johanna's
motivational insults driving me on, i have to drop out after a
mile.
it's my ribs, i explain to the trainer, a no-nonsense
middle-aged woman we're supposed to address as
soldier york. "they're still bruised."
"well, i'll tell you, soldier everdeen, those are going to
take at least another month to heal up on their own, she"
says.i shake my head. "i don't have a month."
she looks me up and down. "the doctors haven't
offered you any treatment?"
is there a treatment? i ask. "they said they had to
mend naturally."
"that's what they say. but they could speed up the
process if i recommend it. i warn you, though, it isn't any
fun, she tells me."
please. i've got to get to the capitol, i say.
soldier york doesn't question this. she scribbles
something on a pad and sends me directly back to the
hospital. i hesitate. i don't want to miss any more training.
i'll be back for the afternoon session, i promise. she just
purses her lips.
twenty-four needle jabs to my rib cage later, i'm
flattened out on my hospital bed, gritting my teeth to keep
from begging them to bring back my morphling drip. it's
been by my bed so i can take a hit as needed. i haven't
used it lately, but i kept it for johanna's sake. today they
tested my blood to make sure it was clean of the painkiller,
as the mixture of the two drugs--the morphling and
whatever's set my ribs on fire--has dangerous side effects.
they made it clear i would have a difficult couple of days.
but i told them to go ahead.
it's a bad night in our room. sleep's out of the question.
i think i can actually smell the ring of flesh around my chest
burning, and johanna's fighting off withdrawal symptoms.
early on, when i apologize about cutting off her morphling
supply, she waves it off, saying it had to happen anyway.
but by three in the morning, i'm the target of every colorful
bit of profanity district 7 has to offer. at dawn, she drags
me out of bed, determined to get to training.
i don't think i can do it, i confess.
"you can do it. we both can. we're victors,
remember? we're the ones who can survive anything they
throw at us, she snarls at me. she's a sick greenish color,"
shaking like a leaf. i get dressed.
we must be victors to make it through the morning. i
think i'm going to lose johanna when we realize it's pouring
outside. her face turns ashen and she seems to have
ceased breathing.
it's just water. it won't kill us, i say. she clenches her
jaw and stomps out into the mud. rain drenches us as we
work our bodies and then slog around the running course. i
bail after a mile again, and i have to resist the temptation to
take off my shirt so the cold water can sizzle off my ribs. i
force down my field lunch of soggy fish and beet stew.
johanna gets halfway through her bowl before it comes
back up. in the afternoon, we learn to assemble our guns. i
manage it, but johanna can't hold her hands steady enough
to fit the parts together. when york's back is turned, i help
her out. even though the rain continues, the afternoon's an
improvement because we're on the shooting range. at last,
something i'm good at. it takes some adjusting from a bow
to a gun, but by the end of the day, i've got the best score in
my class.
we're just inside the hospital doors when johanna
declares, "this has to stop. us living in the hospital.
everyone views us as patients."
it's not a problem for me. i can move into our family
compartment, but johanna's never been assigned one.
when she tries to get discharged from the hospital, they
won't agree to let her live alone, even if she comes in for
daily talks with the head doctor. i think they may have put
two and two together about the morphling and this only
adds to their view that she's unstable. "she won't be alone.
i'm going to room with her," i announce. there's some
dissent, but haymitch takes our part, and by bedtime, we
have a compartment across from prim and my mother, who
agrees to keep an eye on us.
after i take a shower, and johanna sort of wipes
herself down with a damp cloth, she makes a cursory
inspection of the place. when she opens the drawer that
holds my few possessions, she shuts it quickly. "sorry."
i think how there's nothing in johanna's drawer but her
government-issued clothes. that she doesn't have one
thing in the world to call her own. "it's okay. you can look at
my stuff if you want."
johanna unlatches my locket, studying the pictures of
gale, prim, and my mother. she opens the silver parachute
and pulls out the spile and slips it onto her pinkie. "makes
me thirsty just looking at it." then she finds the pearl peeta
gave me. "is this--?"
yeah, i say. "made it through somehow." i don't want
to talk about peeta. one of the best things about training is,
it keeps me from thinking of him.
haymitch says he's getting better, she says.
maybe. but he's changed, i say.
"so have you. so have i. and finnick and haymitch
and beetee. don't get me started on annie cresta. the
arena messed us all up pretty good, don't you think? or do
you still feel like the girl who volunteered for your sister?"
she asks me.
no, i answer.
"that's the one thing i think my head doctor might be
right about. there's no going back. so we might as well get
on with things. she neatly returns my keepsakes to the"
drawer and climbs into the bed across from me just as the
lights go out. "you're not afraid i'll kill you tonight?"
like i couldn't take you, i answer. then we laugh,
since both our bodies are so wrecked, it will be a miracle if
we can get up the next day. but we do. each morning, we
do. and by the end of the week, my ribs feel almost like
new, and johanna can assemble her rifle without help.
soldier york gives the pair of us an approving nod as
we knock off for the day. "fine job, soldiers."
when we move out of hearing, johanna mutters, "i
think winning the games was easier." but the look on her
face says she's pleased.
in fact, we're almost in good spirits when we go to the
dining hall, where gale's waiting to eat with me. receiving
a giant serving of beef stew doesn't hurt my mood either.
first shipments of food arrived this morning, greasy sae
tells me. "that's real beef, from district ten. not any of your
wild dog."
don't remember you turning it down, gale tosses
back. we join a group that includes delly, annie, and
finnick. it's something to see finnick's transformation since
his marriage. his earlier incarnations--the decadent capitol
heartthrob i met before the quell, the enigmatic ally in the
arena, the broken young man who tried to help me hold it
together--these have been replaced by someone who
radiates life. finnick's real charms of self-effacing humor
and an easygoing nature are on display for the first time.
he never lets go of annie's hand. not when they walk, not
when they eat. i doubt he ever plans to. she's lost in some
daze of happiness. there are still moments when you can
tell something slips in her brain and another world blinds
her to us. but a few words from finnick call her back.
delly, who i've known since i was little but never gave
much thought to, has grown in my estimation. she was told
what peeta said to me that night after the wedding, but
she's not a gossip. haymitch says she's the best defender i
have when peeta goes off on some kind of tear about me.
always taking my side, blaming his negative perceptions
on the capitol's torture. she has more influence on him than
any of the others do, because he really does know her.
anyway, even if she's sugarcoating my good points, i
appreciate it. frankly, i could use a little sugarcoating.
i'm starving and the stew is so delicious--beef,
potatoes, turnips, and onions in a thick gravy--that i have to
force myself to slow down. all around the dining hall, you
can feel the rejuvenating effect that a good meal can bring
on. the way it can make people kinder, funnier, more
optimistic, and remind them it's not a mistake to go on
living. it's better than any medicine. so i try to make it last
and join in the conversation. sop up the gravy on my bread
and nibble on it as i listen to finnick telling some ridiculous
story about a sea turtle swimming off with his hat. laugh
before i realize he's standing there. directly across the
table, behind the empty seat next to johanna. watching
me. i choke momentarily as the gravy bread sticks in my
throat.
peeta! says delly. "it's so nice to see you out...and
about."
two large guards stand behind him. he holds his tray
awkwardly, balanced on his fingertips since his wrists are
shackled with a short chain between them.
what's with the fancy bracelets? asks johanna.
i'm not quite trustworthy yet, says peeta. "i can't even
sit here without your permission." he indicates the guards
with his head.
sure he can sit here. we're old friends, says
johanna, patting the space beside her. the guards nod
and peeta takes a seat. "peeta and i had adjoining cells in
the capitol. we're very familiar with each other's screams."
annie, who's on johanna's other side, does that thing
where she covers her ears and exits reality. finnick shoots
johanna an angry look as his arm encircles annie.
"what? my head doctor says i'm not supposed to
censor my thoughts. it's part of my therapy, replies"
johanna.
the life has gone out of our little party. finnick
murmurs things to annie until she slowly removes her
hands. then there's a long silence while people pretend to
eat.
annie, says delly brightly, "did you know it was
peeta who decorated your wedding cake? back home, his
family ran the bakery and he did all the icing."
annie cautiously looks across johanna. "thank you,
peeta. it was beautiful."
my pleasure, annie, says peeta, and i hear that old
note of gentleness in his voice that i thought was gone
forever. not that it's directed at me. but still.
if we're going to fit in that walk, we better go, finnick
tells her. he arranges both of their trays so he can carry
them in one hand while holding tightly to her with the other.
good seeing you, peeta.
"you be nice to her, finnick. or i might try and take her
away from you. it could be a joke, if the tone wasn't so"
cold. everything it conveys is wrong. the open distrust of
finnick, the implication that peeta has his eye on annie,
that annie could desert finnick, that i do not even exist.
oh, peeta, says finnick lightly. "don't make me sorry
i restarted your heart." he leads annie away after giving me
a concerned glance.
when they're gone, delly says in a reproachful voice,
he did save your life, peeta. more than once.
for her. he gives me a brief nod. "for the rebellion.
not for me. i don't owe him anything."
i shouldn't rise to the bait, but i do. "maybe not. but
mags is dead and you're still here. that should count for
something."
"yeah, a lot of things should count for something that
don't seem to, katniss. i've got some memories i can't
make sense of, and i don't think the capitol touched them.
a lot of nights on the train, for instance, he says."
again the implications. that more happened on the
train than did. that what did happen--those nights i only
kept my sanity because his arms were around me--no
longer matters. everything a lie, everything a way of
misusing him.
peeta makes a little gesture with his spoon,
connecting gale and me. "so, are you two officially a
couple now, or are they still dragging out the star-crossed
lover thing?"
still dragging, says johanna.
spasms cause peeta's hands to tighten into fists, then
splay out in a bizarre fashion. is it all he can do to keep
them from my neck? i can feel the tension in gale's muscles
next to me, fear an altercation. but gale simply says, "i
wouldn't have believed it if i hadn't seen it myself."
what's that? asks peeta.
you, gale answers.
you'll have to be a little more specific, says peeta.
what about me?
"that they've replaced you with the evil-mutt version of
yourself, says johanna."
gale finishes his milk. "you done?" he asks me. i rise
and we cross to drop off our trays. at the door, an old man
stops me because i'm still clutching the rest of my gravy
bread in my hand. something in my expression, or maybe
the fact that i've made no attempt to conceal it, makes him
go easy on me. he lets me stuff the bread in my mouth and
move on. gale and i are almost to my compartment when
he speaks again. "i didn't expect that."
i told you he hated me, i say.
"it's the way he hates you. it's so...familiar. i used to feel
like that, he admits. ""when i'd watch you kissing him on the"
screen. only i knew i wasn't being entirely fair. he can't see
that."
we reach my door. "maybe he just sees me as i really
am. i have to get some sleep."
gale catches my arm before i can disappear. "so
that's what you're thinking now?" i shrug. "katniss, as your
oldest friend, believe me when i say he's not seeing you as
you really are." he kisses my cheek and goes.
i sit on my bed, trying to stuff information from my
military tactics books into my head while memories of my
nights with peeta on the train distract me. after about
twenty minutes, johanna comes in and throws herself
across the foot of my bed. "you missed the best part. delly
lost her temper at peeta over how he treated you. she got
very squeaky. it was like someone stabbing a mouse with a
fork repeatedly. the whole dining hall was riveted."
what'd peeta do? i ask.
"he started arguing with himself like he was two
people. the guards had to take him away. on the good
side, no one seemed to notice i finished his stew. johanna"
rubs her hand over her protruding belly. i look at the layer of
grime under her fingernails. wonder if the people in 7 ever
bathe. we spend a couple of hours quizzing each other on
military terms. i visit my mother and prim for a while. when
i'm back in my compartment, showered, staring into the
darkness, i finally ask, "johanna, could you really hear him
screaming?"
that was part of it, she says. "like the jabberjays in
the arena. only it was real. and it didn't stop after an hour.
tick, tock."
tick, tock, i whisper back.
roses. wolf mutts. tributes. frosted dolphins.
friends. mockingjays. stylists. me.
everything screams in my dreams tonight.
18
i throw myself into training with a vengeance. eat, live,
and breathe the workouts, drills, weapons practice, lectures
on tactics. a handful of us are moved into an additional
class that gives me hope i may be a contender for the
actual war. the soldiers simply call it the block, but the
tattoo on my arm lists it as s.s.c., short for simulated
street combat. deep in 13, they've built an artificial capitol
city block. the instructor breaks us into squads of eight and
we attempt to carry out missions--gaining a position,
destroying a target, searching a home--as if we were really
fighting our way through the capitol. the thing's rigged so
that everything that can go wrong for you does. a false step
triggers a land mine, a sniper appears on a rooftop, your
gun jams, a crying child leads you into an ambush, your
squadron leader--who's just a voice on the program--gets
hit by a mortar and you have to figure out what to do without
orders. part of you knows it's fake and that they're not going
to kill you. if you set off a land mine, you hear the explosion
and have to pretend to fall over dead. but in other ways, it
feels pretty real in there--the enemy soldiers dressed in
peacekeepers' uniforms, the confusion of a smoke bomb.
they even gas us. johanna and i are the only ones who get
our masks on in time. the rest of our squad gets knocked
out for ten minutes. and the supposedly harmless gas i took
a few lungfuls of gives me a wicked headache for the rest
of the day.
cressida and her crew tape johanna and me on the
firing range. i know gale and finnick are being filmed as
well. it's part of a new propos series to show the rebels
preparing for the capitol invasion. on the whole, things are
going pretty well.
then peeta starts showing up for our morning
workouts. the manacles are off, but he's still constantly
accompanied by a pair of guards. after lunch, i see him
across the field, drilling with a group of beginners. i don't
know what they're thinking. if a spat with delly can reduce
him to arguing with himself, he's got no business learning
how to assemble a gun.
when i confront plutarch, he assures me that it's all for
the camera. they've got footage of annie getting married
and johanna hitting targets, but all of panem is wondering
about peeta. they need to see he's fighting for the rebels,
not for snow. and maybe if they could just get a couple of
shots of the two of us, not kissing necessarily, just looking
happy to be back together--
i walk away from the conversation right then. that is not
going to happen.
in my rare moments of downtime, i anxiously watch the
preparations for the invasions. see equipment and
provisions readied, divisions assembled. you can tell when
someone's received orders because they're given a very
short haircut, the mark of a person going into battle. there
is much talk of the opening offensive, which will be to
secure the train tunnels that feed up into the capitol.
just a few days before the first troops are to move out,
york unexpectedly tells johanna and me she's
recommended us for the exam, and we're to report
immediately. there are four parts: an obstacle course that
assesses your physical condition, a written tactics exam, a
test of weapons proficiency, and a simulated combat
situation in the block. i don't even have time to get nervous
for the first three and do well, but there's a backlog at the
block. some kind of technical bug they're working out. a
group of us exchanges information. this much seems true.
you go through alone. there's no predicting what situation
you'll be thrown into. one boy says, under his breath, that
he's heard it's designed to target each individual's
weaknesses.
my weaknesses? that's a door i don't even want to
open. but i find a quiet spot and try to assess what they
might be. the length of the list depresses me. lack of
physical brute force. a bare minimum of training. and
somehow my stand-out status as the mockingjay doesn't
seem to be an advantage in a situation where they're trying
to get us to blend into a pack. they could nail me to the wall
on any number of things.
johanna's called three ahead of me, and i give her a
nod of encouragement. i wish i had been at the top of the
list because now i'm really overthinking the whole thing. by
the time my name's called, i don't know what my strategy
should be. fortunately, once i'm in the block, a certain
amount of training does kick in. it's an ambush situation.
peacekeepers appear almost instantly and i have to make
my way to a rendezvous point to meet up with my scattered
squad. i slowly navigate the street, taking out
peacekeepers as i go. two on the rooftop to my left,
another in the doorway up ahead. it's challenging, but not as
hard as i was expecting. there's a nagging feeling that if it's
too simple, i must be missing the point. i'm within a couple
of buildings from my goal when things begin to heat up. a
half dozen peacekeepers come charging around the
corner. they will outgun me, but i notice something. a drum
of gasoline lying carelessly in the gutter. this is it. my test.
to perceive that blowing up the drum will be the only way to
achieve my mission. just as i step out to do it, my squadron
leader, who's been fairly useless up to this point, quietly
orders me to hit the ground. every instinct i have screams
for me to ignore the voice, to pull the trigger, to blow the
peacekeepers sky-high. and suddenly, i realize what the
military will think my biggest weakness is. from my first
moment in the games, when i ran for that orange
backpack, to the firefight in 8, to my impulsive race across
the square in 2. i cannot take orders.
i smack into the ground so hard and fast, i'll be picking
gravel out of my chin for a week. someone else blows the
gas tank. the peacekeepers die. i make my rendezvous
point. when i exit the block on the far side, a soldier
congratulates me, stamps my hand with squad number
451, and tells me to report to command. almost giddy with
success, i run through the halls, skidding around corners,
bounding down the steps because the elevator's too slow. i
bang into the room before the oddity of the situation dawns
on me. i shouldn't be in command; i should be getting my
hair buzzed. the people around the table aren't freshly
minted soldiers but the ones calling the shots.
boggs smiles and shakes his head when he sees me.
let's see it. unsure now, i hold out my stamped hand.
"you're with me. it's a special unit of sharpshooters. join
your squad. he nods over at a group lining the wall. gale."
finnick. five others i don't know. my squad. i'm not only in, i
get to work under boggs. with my friends. i force myself to
take calm, soldierly steps to join them, instead of jumping
up and down.
we must be important, too, because we're in
command, and it has nothing to do with a certain
mockingjay. plutarch stands over a wide, flat panel in the
center of the table. he's explaining something about the
nature of what we will encounter in the capitol. i'm thinking
this is a terrible presentation--because even on tiptoe i
can't see what's on the panel--until he hits a button. a
holographic image of a block of the capitol projects into
the air.
"this, for example, is the area surrounding one of the
peacekeepers' barracks. not unimportant, but not the most
crucial of targets, and yet look. plutarch enters some sort"
of code on a keyboard, and lights begin to flash. they're in
an assortment of colors and blink at different speeds.
"each light is called a pod. it represents a different
obstacle, the nature of which could be anything from a
bomb to a band of mutts. make no mistake, whatever it
contains is designed to either trap or kill you. some have
been in place since the dark days, others developed over
the years. to be honest, i created a fair number myself.
this program, which one of our people absconded with
when we left the capitol, is our most recent information.
they don't know we have it. but even so, it's likely that new
pods have been activated in the last few months. this is
what you will face."
i'm unaware that my feet are moving to the table until
i'm inches from the holograph. my hand reaches in and
cups a rapidly blinking green light.
someone joins me, his body tense. finnick, of course.
because only a victor would see what i see so immediately.
the arena. laced with pods controlled by gamemakers.
finnick's fingers caress a steady red glow over a doorway.
ladies and gentlemen...
his voice is quiet, but mine rings through the room.
let the seventy-sixth hunger games begin!
i laugh. quickly. before anyone has time to register
what lies beneath the words i have just uttered. before
eyebrows are raised, objections are uttered, two and two
are put together, and the solution is that i should be kept as
far away from the capitol as possible. because an angry,
independently thinking victor with a layer of psychological
scar tissue too thick to penetrate is maybe the last person
you want on your squad.
"i don't even know why you bothered to put finnick and
me through training, plutarch, i say."
"yeah, we're already the two best-equipped soldiers
you have, finnick adds cockily."
do not think that fact escapes me, he says with an
impatient wave. "now back in line, soldiers odair and
everdeen. i have a presentation to finish."
we retreat to our places, ignoring the questioning
looks thrown our way. i adopt an attitude of extreme
concentration as plutarch continues, nodding my head here
and there, shifting my position to get a better view, all the
while telling myself to hang on until i can get to the woods
and scream. or curse. or cry. or maybe all three at once.
if this was a test, finnick and i both pass it. when
plutarch finishes and the meeting's adjourned, i have a bad
moment when i learn there's a special order for me. but it's
merely that i skip the military haircut because they would
like the mockingjay to look as much like the girl in the arena
as possible at the anticipated surrender. for the cameras,
you know. i shrug to communicate that my hair length's a
matter of complete indifference to me. they dismiss me
without further comment.
finnick and i gravitate toward each other in the
hallway. "what will i tell annie?" he says under his breath.
nothing, i answer. "that's what my mother and sister
will be hearing from me." bad enough that we know we're
heading back into a fully equipped arena. no use dropping
it on our loved ones.
if she sees that holograph-- he begins.
she won't. it's classified information. it must be, i say.
"anyway, it's not like an actual games. any number of
people will survive. we're just overreacting because--well,
you know why. you still want to go, don't you?"
"of course. i want to destroy snow as much as you
do, he says."
it won't be like the others, i say firmly, trying to
convince myself as well. then the real beauty of the
situation dawns on me. "this time snow will be a player,
too."
before we can continue, haymitch appears. he wasn't
at the meeting, isn't thinking of arenas but something else.
johanna's back in the hospital.
i assumed johanna was fine, had passed her exam,
but simply wasn't assigned to a sharpshooters' unit. she's
wicked throwing an ax but about average with a gun. "is she
hurt? what happened?"
"it was while she was on the block. they try to ferret
out a soldier's potential weaknesses. so they flooded the
street, says haymitch."
this doesn't help. johanna can swim. at least, i seem
to remember her swimming around some in the quarter
quell. not like finnick, of course, but none of us are like
finnick. "so?"
"that's how they tortured her in the capitol. soaked
her and then used electric shocks, says haymitch. ""in the"
block she had some kind of flashback. panicked, didn't
know where she was. she's back under sedation." finnick
and i just stand there, as if we've lost the ability to respond. i
think of the way johanna never showers. how she forced
herself into the rain like it was acid that day. i had attributed
her misery to the morphling withdrawal.
"you two should go see her. you're as close to friends
as she's got, says haymitch."
that makes the whole thing worse. i don't really know
what's between johanna and finnick. but i hardly know her.
no family. no friends. not so much as a token from 7 to set
beside her regulation clothes in her anonymous drawer.
nothing.
i better go tell plutarch. he won't be happy, haymitch
continues. "he wants as many victors as possible for the
cameras to follow in the capitol. thinks it makes for better
television."
are you and beetee going? i ask.
as many young and attractive victors as possible,
haymitch corrects himself. "so, no. we'll be here."
finnick goes directly down to see johanna, but i linger
outside a few minutes until boggs comes out. he's my
commander now, so i guess he's the one to ask for any
special favors. when i tell him what i want to do, he writes
me a pass so that i can go to the woods during reflection,
provided i stay within sight of the guards. i run to my
compartment, thinking to use the parachute, but it's so full of
ugly memories. instead, i go across the hall and take one of
the white cotton bandages i brought from 12. square.
sturdy. just the thing.
in the woods, i find a pine tree and strip handfuls of
fragrant needles from the boughs. after making a neat pile
in the middle of the bandage, i gather up the sides, give
them a twist, and tie them tightly with a length of vine,
making an apple-sized bundle.
at the hospital room door, i watch johanna for a
moment, realize that most of her ferocity is in her abrasive
attitude. stripped of that, as she is now, there's only a slight
young woman, her wide-set eyes fighting to stay awake
against the power of the drugs. terrified of what sleep will
bring. i cross to her and hold out the bundle.
what's that? she says hoarsely. damp edges of her
hair form little spikes over her forehead.
i made it for you. something to put in your drawer. i
place it in her hands. "smell it."
she lifts the bundle to her nose and takes a tentative
sniff. "smells like home." tears flood her eyes.
"that's what i was hoping. you being from seven and
all, i say. ""remember when we met? you were a tree."
well, briefly."
suddenly, she has my wrist in an iron grip. "you have
to kill him, katniss."
don't worry. i resist the temptation to wrench my arm
free.
swear it. on something you care about, she hisses.
i swear it. on my life. but she doesn't let go of my
arm.
on your family's life, she insists.
on my family's life, i repeat. i guess my concern for
my own survival isn't compelling enough. she lets go and i
rub my wrist. "why do you think i'm going, anyway,
brainless?"
that makes her smile a little. "i just needed to hear it."
she presses the bundle of pine needles to her nose and
closes her eyes.
the remaining days go by in a whirl. after a brief
workout each morning, my squad's on the shooting range
full-time in training. i practice mostly with a gun, but they
reserve an hour a day for specialty weapons, which means i
get to use my mockingjay bow, gale his heavy militarized
one. the trident beetee designed for finnick has a lot of
special features, but the most remarkable is that he can
throw it, press a button on a metal cuff on his wrist, and
return it to his hand without chasing it down.
sometimes we shoot at peacekeeper dummies to
become familiar with the weaknesses in their protective
gear. the chinks in the armor, so to speak. if you hit flesh,
you're rewarded with a burst of fake blood. our dummies
are soaked in red.
it's reassuring to see just how high the overall level of
accuracy is in our group. along with finnick and gale, the
squad includes five soldiers from 13. jackson, a middleaged
woman who's boggs's second in command, looks
kind of sluggish but can hit things the rest of us can't even
see without a scope. farsighted, she says. there's a pair
of sisters in their twenties named leeg--we call them leeg
1 and leeg 2 for clarity--who are so similar in uniform, i
can't tell them apart until i notice leeg 1 has weird yellow
flecks in her eyes. two older guys, mitchell and homes,
never say much but can shoot the dust off your boots at fifty
yards. i see other squads that are also quite good, but i
don't fully understand our status until the morning plutarch
joins us.
"squad four-five-one, you have been selected for a
special mission, he begins. i bite the inside of my lip,"
hoping against hope that it's to assassinate snow. "we
have numerous sharpshooters, but rather a dearth of
camera crews. therefore, we've handpicked the eight of
you to be what we call our 'star squad.' you will be the onscreen
faces of the invasion."
disappointment, shock, then anger run through the
group. "what you're saying is, we won't be in actual
combat," snaps gale.
"you will be in combat, but perhaps not always on the
front line. if one can even isolate a front line in this type of
war, says plutarch."
none of us wants that. finnick's remark is followed
by a general rumble of assent, but i stay silent. "we're
going to fight."
"you're going to be as useful to the war effort as
possible, plutarch says. ""and it's been decided that you"
are of most value on television. just look at the effect
katniss had running around in that mockingjay suit. turned
the whole rebellion around. do you notice how she's the
only one not complaining? it's because she understands the
power of that screen."
actually, katniss isn't complaining because she has no
intention of staying with the "star squad," but she
recognizes the necessity of getting to the capitol before
carrying out any plan. still, to be too compliant may arouse
suspicion as well.
but it's not all pretend, is it? i ask. "that'd be a waste
of talent."
don't worry, plutarch tells me. "you'll have plenty of
real targets to hit. but don't get blown up. i've got enough on
my plate without having to replace you. now get to the
capitol and put on a good show."
the morning we ship out, i say good-bye to my family. i
haven't told them how much the capitol's defenses mirror
the weapons in the arena, but my going off to war is awful
enough on its own. my mother holds me tightly for a long
time. i feel tears on her cheek, something she suppressed
when i was slated for the games. "don't worry. i'll be
perfectly safe. i'm not even a real soldier. just one of
plutarch's televised puppets," i reassure her.
prim walks me as far as the hospital doors. "how do
you feel?"
"better, knowing you're somewhere snow can't reach
you, i say."
next time we see each other, we'll be free of him,
says prim firmly. then she throws her arms around my
neck. "be careful."
i consider saying a final good-bye to peeta, decide it
would only be bad for both of us. but i do slip the pearl into
the pocket of my uniform. a token of the boy with the bread.
a hovercraft takes us to, of all places, 12, where a
makeshift transportation area has been set up outside the
fire zone. no luxury trains this time, but a cargo car packed
to the limit with soldiers in their dark gray uniforms,
sleeping with their heads on their packs. after a couple of
days' travel, we disembark inside one of the mountain
tunnels leading to the capitol, and make the rest of the sixhour
trek on foot, taking care to step only on a glowing
green paint line that marks safe passage to the air above.
we come out in the rebel encampment, a ten-block
stretch outside the train station where peeta and i made
our previous arrivals. it's already crawling with soldiers.
squad 451 is assigned a spot to pitch its tents. this area
has been secured for over a week. rebels pushed out the
peacekeepers, losing hundreds of lives in the process. the
capitol forces fell back and have regrouped farther into the
city. between us lie the booby-trapped streets, empty and
inviting. each one will need to be swept of pods before we
can advance.
mitchell asks about hoverplane bombings--we do feel
very naked pitched out in the open--but boggs says it's not
an issue. most of the capitol's air fleet was destroyed in 2
or during the invasion. if it has any craft left, it's holding on to
them. probably so snow and his inner circle can make a
last-minute escape to some presidential bunker
somewhere if needed. our own hoverplanes were
grounded after the capitol's antiaircraft missiles decimated
the first few waves. this war will be battled out on the
streets with, hopefully, only superficial damage to the
infrastructure and a minimum of human casualties. the
rebels want the capitol, just as the capitol wanted 13.
after three days, much of squad 451 risks deserting
out of boredom. cressida and her team take shots of us
firing. they tell us we're part of the disinformation team. if
the rebels only shoot plutarch's pods, it will take the capitol
about two minutes to realize we have the holograph. so
there's a lot of time spent shattering things that don't matter,
to throw them off the scent. mostly we just add to the piles
of rainbow glass that's been blown off the exteriors of the
candy-colored buildings. i suspect they are intercutting this
footage with the destruction of significant capitol targets.
once in a while it seems a real sharpshooter's services are
needed. eight hands go up, but gale, finnick, and i are
never chosen.
it's your own fault for being so camera-ready, i tell
gale. if looks could kill.
i don't think they quite know what to do with the three of
us, particularly me. i have my mockingjay outfit with me, but
i've only been taped in my uniform. sometimes i use a gun,
sometimes they ask me to shoot with my bow and arrows.
it's as if they don't want to entirely lose the mockingjay, but
they want to downgrade my role to foot soldier. since i don't
care, it's amusing rather than upsetting to imagine the
arguments going on back in 13.
while i outwardly express discontent about our lack of
any real participation, i'm busy with my own agenda. each
of us has a paper map of the capitol. the city forms an
almost perfect square. lines divide the map into smaller
squares, with letters along the top and numbers down the
side to form a grid. i consume this, noting every intersection
and side street, but it's remedial stuff. the commanders
here are working off plutarch's holograph. each has a
handheld contraption called a holo that produces images
like i saw in command. they can zoom into any area of the
grid and see what pods await them. the holo's an
independent unit, a glorified map really, since it can neither
send nor receive signals. but it's far superior to my paper
version.
a holo is activated by a specific commander's voice
giving his or her name. once it's working, it responds to the
other voices in the squadron so if, say, boggs were killed
or severely disabled, someone could take over. if anyone in
the squad repeats "nightlock" three times in a row, the holo
will explode, blowing everything in a five-yard radius skyhigh.
this is for security reasons in the event of capture. it's
understood that we would all do this without hesitation.
so what i need to do is steal boggs's activated holo
and clear out before he notices. i think it would be easier to
steal his teeth.
on the fourth morning, soldier leeg 2 hits a
mislabeled pod. it doesn't unleash a swarm of muttation
gnats, which the rebels are prepared for, but shoots out a
sunburst of metal darts. one finds her brain. she's gone
before the medics can reach her. plutarch promises a
speedy replacement.
the following evening, the newest member of our
squad arrives. with no manacles. no guards. strolling out
of the train station with his gun swinging from the strap over
his shoulder. there's shock, confusion, resistance, but 451
is stamped on the back of peeta's hand in fresh ink. boggs
relieves him of his weapon and goes to make a call.
it won't matter, peeta tells the rest of us. "the
president assigned me herself. she decided the propos
needed some heating up."
maybe they do. but if coin sent peeta here, she's
decided something else as well. that i'm of more use to her
dead than alive.
part iii
the assassin
19
i've never really seen boggs angry before. not when
i've disobeyed his orders or puked on him, not even when
gale broke his nose. but he's angry when he returns from
his phone call with the president. the first thing he does is
instruct soldier jackson, his second in command, to set up
a two-person, round-the-clock guard on peeta. then he
takes me on a walk, weaving through the sprawling tent
encampment until our squad is far behind us.
he'll try and kill me anyway, i say. "especially here.
where there are so many bad memories to set him off."
i'll keep him contained, katniss, says boggs.
why does coin want me dead now? i ask.
she denies she does, he answers.
but we know it's true, i say. "and you must at least
have a theory."
boggs gives me a long, hard look before he answers.
"here's as much as i know. the president doesn't like you.
she never did. it was peeta she wanted rescued from the
arena, but no one else agreed. it made matters worse when
you forced her to give the other victors immunity. but even
that could be overlooked in view of how well you've
performed."
then what is it? i insist.
"sometime in the near future, this war will be resolved.
a new leader will be chosen, says boggs."
i roll my eyes. "boggs, no one thinks i'm going to be
the leader."
no. they don't, he agrees. "but you'll throw support to
someone. would it be president coin? or someone else?"
i don't know. i've never thought about it, i say.
"if your immediate answer isn't coin, then you're a
threat. you're the face of the rebellion. you may have more
influence than any other single person, says boggs."
outwardly, the most you've ever done is tolerated her.
so she'll kill me to shut me up. the minute i say the
words, i know they're true.
"she doesn't need you as a rallying point now. as she
said, your primary objective, to unite the districts, has
succeeded, boggs reminds me. ""these current propos"
could be done without you. there's only one last thing you
could do to add fire to the rebellion."
die, i say quietly.
yes. give us a martyr to fight for, says boggs. "but
that's not going to happen under my watch, soldier
everdeen. i'm planning for you to have a long life."
why? this kind of thinking will only bring him trouble.
you don't owe me anything.
because you've earned it, he says. "now get back to
your squad."
i know i should feel appreciative of boggs sticking his
neck out for me, but really i'm just frustrated. i mean, how
can i steal his holo and desert now? betraying him was
complicated enough without this whole new layer of debt. i
already owe him for saving my life.
seeing the cause of my current dilemma calmly
pitching his tent back at our site makes me furious. "what
time is my watch?" i ask jackson.
she squints at me in doubt, or maybe she's just trying
to get my face in focus. "i didn't put you in the rotation."
why not? i ask.
"i'm not sure you could really shoot peeta, if it came to
it, she says."
i speak up so the whole squad can hear me clearly. "i
wouldn't be shooting peeta. he's gone. johanna's right. it'd
be just like shooting another of the capitol's mutts." it feels
good to say something horrible about him, out loud, in
public, after all the humiliation i've felt since his return.
"well, that sort of comment isn't recommending you
either, says jackson."
put her in the rotation, i hear boggs say behind me.
jackson shakes her head and makes a note.
midnight to four. you're on with me.
the dinner whistle sounds, and gale and i line up at
the canteen. "do you want me to kill him?" he asks bluntly.
that'll get us both sent back for sure, i say. but even
though i'm furious, the brutality of the offer rattles me. "i can
deal with him."
"you mean until you take off? you and your paper map
and possibly a holo if you can get your hands on it? so"
gale has not missed my preparations. i hope they haven't
been so obvious to the others. none of them know my mind
like he does, though. "you're not planning on leaving me
behind, are you?" he asks.
up until this point, i was. but having my hunting partner
to watch my back doesn't sound like a bad idea. "as your
fellow soldier, i have to strongly recommend you stay with
your squad. but i can't stop you from coming, can i?"
he grins. "no. not unless you want me to alert the rest
of the army."
squad 451 and the television crew collect dinner from
the canteen and gather in a tense circle to eat. at first i think
that peeta is the cause of the unease, but by the end of the
meal, i realize more than a few unfriendly looks have been
directed my way. this is a quick turnaround, since i'm pretty
sure when peeta appeared the whole team was concerned
about how dangerous he might be, especially to me. but it's
not until i get a phone call through to haymitch that i
understand.
"what are you trying to do? provoke him into an
attack? he asks me."
of course not. i just want him to leave me alone, i say.
"well, he can't. not after what the capitol put him
through, says haymitch. ""look, coin may have sent him"
there hoping he'd kill you, but peeta doesn't know that. he
doesn't understand what's happened to him. so you can't
blame him--"
i don't! i say.
"you do! you're punishing him over and over for things
that are out of his control. now, i'm not saying you shouldn't
have a fully loaded weapon next to you round the clock. but
i think it's time you flipped this little scenario around in your
head. if you'd been taken by the capitol, and hijacked, and
then tried to kill peeta, is this the way he would be treating
you? demands haymitch."
i fall silent. it isn't. it isn't how he would be treating me at
all. he would be trying to get me back at any cost. not
shutting me out, abandoning me, greeting me with hostility
at every turn.
"you and me, we made a deal to try and save him.
remember? haymitch says. when i don't respond, he"
disconnects after a curt "try and remember."
the autumn day turns from brisk to cold. most of the
squad hunker down in their sleeping bags. some sleep
under the open sky, close to the heater in the center of our
camp, while others retreat to their tents. leeg 1 has finally
broken down over her sister's death, and her muffled sobs
reach us through the canvas. i huddle in my tent, thinking
over haymitch's words. realizing with shame that my
fixation with assassinating snow has allowed me to ignore
a much more difficult problem. trying to rescue peeta from
the shadowy world the hijacking has stranded him in. i don't
know how to find him, let alone lead him out. i can't even
conceive of a plan. it makes the task of crossing a loaded
arena, locating snow, and putting a bullet through his head
look like child's play.
at midnight, i crawl out of my tent and position myself
on a camp stool near the heater to take my watch with
jackson. boggs told peeta to sleep out in full view where
the rest of us could keep an eye on him. he isn't sleeping,
though. instead, he sits with his bag pulled up to his chest,
clumsily trying to make knots in a short length of rope. i
know it well. it's the one finnick lent me that night in the
bunker. seeing it in his hands, it's like finnick's echoing
what haymitch just said, that i've cast off peeta. now might
be a good time to begin to remedy that. if i could think of
something to say. but i can't. so i don't. i just let the sounds
of soldiers' breathing fill the night.
after about an hour, peeta speaks up. "these last
couple of years must have been exhausting for you. trying
to decide whether to kill me or not. back and forth. back
and forth."
that seems grossly unfair, and my first impulse is to
say something cutting. but i revisit my conversation with
haymitch and try to take the first tentative step in peeta's
direction. "i never wanted to kill you. except when i thought
you were helping the careers kill me. after that, i always
thought of you as...an ally." that's a good safe word. empty
of any emotional obligation, but nonthreatening.
ally. peeta says the word slowly, tasting it. "friend.
lover. victor. enemy. fiancee. target. mutt. neighbor.
hunter. tribute. ally. i'll add it to the list of words i use to try
to figure you out." he weaves the rope in and out of his
fingers. "the problem is, i can't tell what's real anymore,
and what's made up."
the cessation of rhythmic breathing suggests that
either people have woken or have never really been asleep
at all. i suspect the latter.
finnick's voice rises from a bundle in the shadows.
then you should ask, peeta. that's what annie does.
ask who? peeta says. "who can i trust?"
well, us for starters. we're your squad, says
jackson.
you're my guards, he points out.
that, too, she says. "but you saved a lot of lives in
thirteen. it's not the kind of thing we forget."
in the quiet that follows, i try to imagine not being able
to tell illusion from reality. not knowing if prim or my mother
loved me. if snow was my enemy. if the person across the
heater saved or sacrificed me. with very little effort, my life
rapidly morphs into a nightmare. i suddenly want to tell
peeta everything about who he is, and who i am, and how
we ended up here. but i don't know how to start. worthless.
i'm worthless.
at a few minutes before four, peeta turns to me again.
your favorite color...it's green?
that's right. then i think of something to add. "and
yours is orange."
orange? he seems unconvinced.
not bright orange. but soft. like the sunset, i say. "at
least, that's what you told me once."
oh. he closes his eyes briefly, maybe trying to
conjure up that sunset, then nods his head. "thank you."
but more words tumble out. "you're a painter. you're a
baker. you like to sleep with the windows open. you never
take sugar in your tea. and you always double-knot your
shoelaces."
then i dive into my tent before i do something stupid
like cry.
in the morning, gale, finnick, and i go out to shoot
some glass off the buildings for the camera crew. when we
get back to camp, peeta's sitting in a circle with the
soldiers from 13, who are armed but talking openly with
him. jackson has devised a game called "real or not
real" to help peeta. he mentions something he thinks
happened, and they tell him if it's true or imagined, usually
followed by a brief explanation.
most of the people from twelve were killed in the fire.
"real. less than nine hundred of you made it to
thirteen alive."
the fire was my fault.
"not real. president snow destroyed twelve the way
he did thirteen, to send a message to the rebels."
this seems like a good idea until i realize that i'll be the
only one who can confirm or deny most of what weighs on
him. jackson breaks us up into watches. she matches up
finnick, gale, and me each with a soldier from 13. this
way peeta will always have access to someone who knows
him more personally. it's not a steady conversation. peeta
spends a long time considering even small pieces of
information, like where people bought their soap back
home. gale fills him in on a lot of stuff about 12; finnick is
the expert on both of peeta's games, as he was a mentor
in the first and a tribute in the second. but since peeta's
greatest confusion centers around me--and not everything
can be explained simply--our exchanges are painful and
loaded, even though we touch on only the most superficial
of details. the color of my dress in 7. my preference for
cheese buns. the name of our math teacher when we were
little. reconstructing his memory of me is excruciating.
perhaps it isn't even possible after what snow did to him.
but it does feel right to help him try.
the next afternoon, we're notified that the whole squad
is needed to stage a fairly complicated propo. peeta's
been right about one thing: coin and plutarch are unhappy
with the quality of footage they're getting from the star
squad. very dull. very uninspiring. the obvious response
is that they never let us do anything but playact with our
guns. however, this is not about defending ourselves, it's
about coming up with a usable product. so today, a special
block has been set aside for filming. it even has a couple of
active pods on it. one unleashes a spray of gunfire. the
other nets the invader and traps them for either
interrogation or execution, depending on the captors'
preference. but it's still an unimportant residential block
with nothing of strategic consequence.
the television crew means to provide a sense of
heightened jeopardy by releasing smoke bombs and
adding gunfire sound effects. we suit up in heavy protective
gear, even the crew, as if we're heading into the heart of
battle. those of us with specialty weapons are allowed to
take them along with our guns. boggs gives peeta back his
gun, too, although he makes sure to tell him in a loud voice
that it's only loaded with blanks.
peeta just shrugs. "i'm not much of a shot anyway." he
seems preoccupied with watching pollux, to the point
where it's getting a little worrisome, when he finally puzzles
it out and begins to speak with agitation. "you're an avox,
aren't you? i can tell by the way you swallow. there were
two avoxes with me in prison. darius and lavinia, but the
guards mostly called them the redheads. they'd been our
servants in the training center, so they arrested them, too. i
watched them being tortured to death. she was lucky. they
used too much voltage and her heart stopped right off. it
took days to finish him off. beating, cutting off parts. they
kept asking him questions, but he couldn't speak, he just
made these horrible animal sounds. they didn't want
information, you know? they wanted me to see it."
peeta looks around at our stunned faces, as if waiting
for a reply. when none is forthcoming, he asks, "real or not
real?" the lack of response upsets him more. "real or not
real?!" he demands.
real, says boggs. "at least, to the best of my
knowledge...real."
peeta sags. "i thought so. there was nothing...shiny
about it." he wanders away from the group, muttering
something about fingers and toes.
i move to gale, press my forehead into the body armor
where his chest should be, feel his arm tighten around me.
we finally know the name of the girl who we watched the
capitol abduct from the woods of 12, the fate of the
peacekeeper friend who tried to keep gale alive. this is no
time to call up happy moments of remembrance. they lost
their lives because of me. i add them to my personal list of
kills that began in the arena and now includes thousands.
when i look up, i see it has taken gale differently. his
expression says that there are not enough mountains to
crush, enough cities to destroy. it promises death.
with peeta's grisly account fresh in our minds, we
crunch through the streets of broken glass until we reach
our target, the block we are to take. it is a real, if small, goal
to accomplish. we gather around boggs to examine the
holo projection of the street. the gunfire pod is positioned
about a third of the way down, just above an apartment
awning. we should be able to trigger it with bullets. the net
pod is at the far end, almost the next corner. this will
require someone to set off the body sensor mechanism.
everyone volunteers except peeta, who doesn't seem to
know quite what's going on. i don't get picked. i get sent to
messalla, who dabs some makeup on my face for the
anticipated close-ups.
the squad positions itself under boggs's direction,
and then we have to wait for cressida to get the
cameramen in place as well. they're both to our left, with
castor toward the front and pollux bringing up the rear so
they'll be sure not to record each other. messalla sets off a
couple of smoke charges for atmosphere. since this is
both a mission and a shoot, i'm about to ask who's in
charge, my commander or my director, when cressida
calls, "action!"
we slowly proceed down the hazy street, just like one
of our exercises in the block. everyone has at least one
section of windows to blow out, but gale's assigned the
real target. when he hits the pod, we take cover--ducking
into doorways or flattening onto the pretty, light orange and
pink paving stones--as a hail of bullets sweeps back and
forth over our heads. after a while, boggs orders us
forward.
cressida stops us before we can rise, since she
needs some close-up shots. we take turns reenacting our
responses. falling to the ground, grimacing, diving into
alcoves. we know it's supposed to be serious business,
but the whole thing feels a little ridiculous. especially when
it turns out that i'm not the worst actor in the squad. not by a
long shot. we're all laughing so hard at mitchell's attempt to
project his idea of desperation, which involves teeth
grinding and nostrils flaring, that boggs has to reprimand
us.
pull it together, four-five-one, he says firmly. but
you can see him suppressing a smile as he's doublechecking
the next pod. positioning the holo to find the best
light in the smoky air. still facing us as his left foot steps
back onto the orange paving stone. triggering the bomb
that blows off his legs.
20
it's as if in an instant, a painted window shatters,
revealing the ugly world behind it. laughter changes to
screams, blood stains pastel stones, real smoke darkens
the special effect stuff made for television.
a second explosion seems to split the air and leaves
my ears ringing. but i can't make out where it came from.
i reach boggs first, try to make sense of the torn flesh,
missing limbs, to find something to stem the red flow from
his body. homes pushes me aside, wrenching open a firstaid
kit. boggs clutches my wrist. his face, gray with dying
and ash, seems to be receding. but his next words are an
order. "the holo."
the holo. i scramble around, digging through chunks
of tile slick with blood, shuddering when i encounter bits of
warm flesh. find it rammed into a stairwell with one of
boggscatching fire

part i "the spark"

i clasp the flask between my hands even though the warmth from the tea has long since leached into the frozen air. my muscles are clenched tight against the cold. if a pack of wild dogs were to appear at this moment, the odds of scaling a tree before they attacked are not in my favor. i should get up, move around, and work the stiffness from my limbs. but instead i sit, as motionless as the rock beneath me, while the dawn begins to lighten the woods. i can't fight the sun. i can only watch helplessly as it drags me into a day that i've been dreading for months. by noon they will all be at my new house in the victor's village. the reporters, the camera crews, even effie trinket, my old escort, will have

made their way to district 12 from the capitol. i wonder if effie will still be wearing that silly pink wig, or if she'll be sporting some other unnatural color especially for the victory tour. there will be others waiting, too. a staff to cater to my every need on the long train trip. a prep team to beautify me for public appearances. my stylist and friend, cinna, who designed the gorgeous outfits that first made the audience take notice of me in the hunger games. if it were up to me, i would try to forget the hunger games entirely. never speak of them. pretend they were nothing but a bad dream. but the victory tour makes that impossible. strategically placed almost midway between the annual games, it is the capitol's way of keeping the horror fresh and immediate. not only are we in the districts forced to remember the iron grip of the capitol's power each year, we are forced to celebrate it. and this year, i am one of the stars
of the show. i will have to travel from district to district, to stand before the cheering crowds who secretly loathe me, to look down into the faces of the families whose children i have killed... the sun persists in rising, so i make myself stand. all my joints complain and my left leg has been asleep for so long that it takes several minutes of pacing to bring the feeling back into it. i've been in the woods three hours, but as i've made no real attempt at hunting, i have nothing to show for it. it doesn't matter for my mother and little sister, prim, anymore. they can afford to buy butcher meat in town, although none of us likes it any better than fresh game. but my best friend, gale hawthorne, and his family will be depending on today's haul and i can't let them down. i start the hour-and-a-half trek it will take to cover our snare line. back when we were in school, we had time in the afternoons to check the line and hunt and gather and still

get back to trade in town. but now that gale has gone to work in the coal mines -- and i have nothing to do all day--i've taken over the job. by this time gale will have clocked in at the

mines, taken the stomach-churning elevator ride into the depths of the earth, and be pounding away at a coal seam. i know what it's like down there. every year in school, as part of our training, my class had to tour the mines. when i was little, it was just unpleasant. the claustrophobic tunnels, foul air, suffocating darkness on all sides. but after my father and several other miners were killed in an explosion, i could barely force myself onto the elevator. the annual trip became an enormous source of anxiety. twice i made myself so sick in anticipation of it that my mother kept me home because she thought i had contracted the flu. i
think of gale, who is only really alive in the woods, with its fresh air and sunlight and clean, flowing water. i don't know how he stands it. well ... yes, i do. he stands it because it's the way to feed his mother and two younger brothers and sister. and here i am with buckets of money, far more than enough to feed both our families now, and he won't take a single coin. it's even hard for him to let me bring in meat, although he'd surely have kept my mother and prim supplied if i'd been killed in the games. i tell him he's doing me a favor, that it drives me nuts to sit around all day. even so, i never drop off the game while he's at home. which is easy since he works twelve hours a day. the only time i really get to see gale now is on sundays, when we meet up in the woods to hunt together. it's still the best day of the week, but it's not like it used to be before, when we could tell each other anything. the games have spoiled even that. i keep

hoping that as time passes we'll regain the ease between us, but part of me knows it's futile. there's no going back. i get a good haul from the traps -- eight rabbits, two squirrels, and a beaver that swam into a wire contraption gale designed himself. he's something of a whiz with snares, rigging them to bent saplings so they pull the kill out of the reach of predators, balancing logs on delicate stick triggers, weaving inescapable baskets to capture fish. as i go along, carefully resetting each snare, i know i can never quite replicate his eye for balance, his instinct for where the prey will cross the path. it's more than experience. it's a natural gift. like the way i can shoot at an animal in almost complete darkness and still take it down with one arrow. by the time i make it back to the fence that surrounds district 12, the sun is well up. as always, i listen a moment, but there's no telltale hum of electrical current running through the chain
link. there hardly ever is, even though the thing is supposed to be charged full-time. i wriggle through the opening at the bottom of the fence and come up in the meadow, just a stone's throw from my home. my old home. we still get to keep it since officially it's the designated dwelling of my mother and sister. if i should drop dead right now, they would have to return to it. but at present, they're both

happily installed in the new house in the victor's village, and i'm the only one who uses the squat little place where i was raised. to me, it's my real home. i go there now to switch my clothes. exchange my father's old leather jacket for a fine wool coat that always seems too tight in the shoulders. leave my soft, worn hunting boots for a pair of expensive machine-made shoes that my mother thinks are more appropriate for someone of my status. i've already

stowed my bow and arrows in a hollow log in the woods. although time is ticking away, i allow myself a few minutes to sit in the kitchen. it has an abandoned quality with no fire on the hearth, no cloth on the table. i mourn my old life here. we barely scraped by, but i knew where i fit in, i knew what my place was in the tightly interwoven fabric that was our life. i wish i could go back to it because, in retrospect, it seems so secure compared with now, when i am so rich and so famous and so hated by the authorities in the capitol. a wailing at the back door demands my attention. i open it to find buttercup, prim's scruffy old tomcat. he dislikes the new house almost as much as i do and always leaves it when my sister's at school. we've never been particularly fond of each other, but now we have this new bond. i let him in, feed him a chunk of beaver fat, and even rub him between the ears for a bit. "you're hideous, you
know that, right?" i ask him. buttercup nudges my hand for more petting, but we have to go. "come on, you." i scoop him up with one hand, grab my game bag with the other, and haul them both out onto the street. the cat springs free and disappears under a bush. the shoes pinch my toes as i crunch along the cinder street. cutting down alleys and through backyards gets me to gale's house in minutes. his mother, hazelle, sees me through the window, where she's bent over the kitchen sink. she dries her hands on her apron and disappears to meet me at the door. i like hazelle. respect her. the explosion that killed my father took out her husband as well, leaving her with three boys and a baby due any day. less than a week after she gave birth, she was out hunting the streets for work. the mines weren't an option, what with a baby to look after, but she managed to get laundry from some of the merchants in town.

at fourteen, gale, the eldest of the kids, became the main supporter of the family. he was already signed up for tesserae, which entitled them to a meager supply of grain and oil in exchange for his entering his name extra times in the drawing to become a tribute. on top of that, even back then, he was a skilled trapper. but it wasn't enough to keep a family of five without hazelle working her fingers to the bone on that washboard. in winter her hands got so red and cracked, they bled at the slightest provocation. still would if it wasn't for a salve my mother concocted. but they are determined, hazelle and gale, that the other boys, twelve- year-old rory and

ten-year-old vick, and the baby, four-year-old posy, will never have to sign up for tesserae. hazelle smiles when she sees the game. she takes the beaver by the tail, feeling its
weight. "he's going to make a nice stew." unlike gale, she has no problem with our hunting arrangement. "good pelt, too," i answer. it's comforting here with hazelle. weighing the merits of the game, just as we always have. she pours me a mug of herb tea, which i wrap my chilled fingers around gratefully. "you know, when i get back from the tour, i was thinking i might take rory out with me sometimes. after school. teach him to shoot." hazelle nods. "that'd be good. gale means to, but he's only got his sundays, and i think he likes saving those for you." i can't stop the redness that floods my cheeks. it's stupid, of course. hardly anybody knows me better than hazelle. knows the bond i share with gale. i'm sure plenty of people assumed that we'd eventually get married even if i never gave it any thought. but that was before the games. before my fellow tribute, peeta mellark, announced he was madly in love with me. our romance

became a key strategy for our survival in the arena. only it wasn't just a strategy for peeta. i'm not sure what it was for me. but i know now it was nothing but painful for gale. my chest tightens as i think about how, on the victory tour, peeta and i will have to present ourselves as lovers again. i gulp my tea even though it's too hot and push back from the table. "i better get going. make myself presentable for the cameras." hazelle hugs me. "enjoy the food." "absolutely," i say. my next stop is the hob, where i've traditionally done the bulk of my trading. years ago it was a warehouse to store coal, but when it fell into disuse, it became a meeting place for illegal trades and then blossomed into a full-time black market. if it attracts a somewhat criminal element, then i belong here, i guess. hunting in the woods surrounding district 12 violates at least a dozen laws and is punishable by death. although they
never mention it, i owe the people who frequent the hob. gale told me that greasy sae, the old woman who serves up soup, started a collection to sponsor peeta and me during the games. it was supposed to be just a hob thing, but a lot of other people heard about it and chipped in. i don't know exactly how much it was, and the price of any gift in the arena was exorbitant. but for all i know, it made the difference between my life and death. it's still odd to drag open the front door with an empty game bag, with nothing to trade, and instead feel the heavy pocket of coins against my hip. i try to hit as many stalls as possible, spreading out my purchases of coffee, buns, eggs, yarn, and oil. as an afterthought, i buy three bottles of white liquor from a one-armed woman named ripper, a victim of a mine accident who was smart enough to find a way to stay alive. the liquor isn't for my family. it's for haymitch,

who acted as mentor for peeta and me in the games. he's surly, violent, and drunk most of the time. but he did his job -- more than his job--because for the first time in history, two tributes were allowed to win. so no matter who haymitch is, i owe him, too. and that's for always. i'm getting the white liquor because a few weeks ago he ran out and there was none for sale and he had a withdrawal, shaking and screaming at terrifying things only he could see. he scared prim to death and, frankly, it wasn't much fun for me to see him like that, either. ever since then i've been sort of stockpiling the stuff just in case there's a shortage again. cray, our head peacekeeper, frowns when he sees me with the bottles. he's an older man with a few strands of silver hair combed sideways above his bright red face. "that stuff's too strong for you, girl." he should know. next to haymitch, cray drinks more than anyone i've ever met. "aw, my
mother uses it in medicines," i say indifferently. "well, it'd kill just about anything," he says, and slaps down a coin for a bottle. when i reach greasy sae's stall, i boost myself up to sit on the counter and order some soup, which looks to be some kind of gourd and bean mixture. a peacekeeper named darius comes up and buys a bowl while i'm eating. as law enforcers go, he's one of my favorites. never really throwing his weight around, usually good for a joke. he's probably in his twenties, but he doesn't seem much older than i do. something about his smile, his red hair that sticks out every which way, gives him a boyish quality. "aren't you supposed to be on a train?" he asks me. "they're collecting me at noon," i answer.

shouldn't you look better? he asks in a loud whisper. i can't help smiling at his teasing, in spite of my mood. "maybe

a ribbon in your hair or something?" he flicks my braid with his hand and i brush him away. "don't worry. by the time they get through with me i'll be unrecognizable," i say. "good," he says. "let's show a little district pride for a change, miss everdeen. hm?" he shakes his head at greasy sae in mock disapproval and walks off to join his friends. "i'll want that bowl back," greasy sae calls after him, but since she's laughing, she doesn't sound particularly stern. "gale going to see you off?" she asks me. "no, he wasn't on the list," i say. "i saw him sunday, though." "think he'd have made the list. him being your cousin and all," she says wryly. it's just one more part of the lie the capitol has concocted. when peeta and i made it into the final eight in the hunger games, they sent reporters to do personal stories about us. when they asked about my friends, everyone directed them to gale. but it wouldn't do, what with the romance i was playing out in
the arena, to have my best friend be gale. he was too handsome, too male, and not the least bit willing to smile and play nice for the cameras. we do resemble each other, though, quite a bit. we have that seam look. dark straight hair, olive skin, gray eyes. so some genius made him my cousin. i didn't know about it until we were already home, on the platform at the train station, and my mother said, "your cousins can hardly wait to see you!" then i turned and saw gale and hazelle and all the kids waiting for me, so what could i do but go along? greasy sae knows we're not related, but even some of the people who have known us for years seem to have forgotten. "i just can't wait for the whole thing to be over," i whisper. "i know," says greasy sae. "but you've got to go through it to get to the end of it. better not be late." a light snow starts to fall as i make my way to the victor's village. it's about a half-mile walk from the square in the

center of town, but it seems like another world entirely. it's a separate community built around a beautiful green, dotted with flowering bushes. there are twelve houses, each large enough to hold ten of the one i was raised in. nine stand empty, as they always have. the three in use belong to haymitch, peeta, and me. the houses inhabited by my family and peeta give off a warm glow of life. lit windows, smoke from the chimneys, bunches of brightly colored corn affixed to the front doors as decoration for the upcoming harvest festival. however, haymitch's house, despite the care taken by the grounds-keeper, exudes an air of abandonment and neglect. i brace myself at his front door, knowing it will be foul, then push inside. my nose immediately wrinkles in disgust. haymitch refuses to let anyone in to clean and does a poor jobekeepers line the
roof across from our former hideout. shells are launched
into the row of apartments, setting off the chain of
explosions we heard, and the building collapses into rubble
and dust.
now we cut to a live feed. a reporter stands on the roof
with the peacekeepers. behind her, the apartment block
burns. firefighters try to control the blaze with water hoses.
we are pronounced dead.
finally, a bit of luck, says homes.
i guess he's right. certainly it's better than having the
capitol in pursuit of us. but i just keep imagining how this
will be playing back in 13. where my mother and prim,
hazelle and the kids, annie, haymitch, and a whole lot of
people from 13 think that they have just seen us die.
my father. he just lost my sister and now... says leeg
1
we watch as they play the footage over and over.
revel in their victory, especially over me. break away to do
a montage of the mockingjay's rise to rebel power--i think
they've had this part prepared for a while, because it
seems pretty polished--and then go live so a couple of
reporters can discuss my well-deserved violent end. later,
they promise, snow will make an official statement. the
screen fades back to a glow.
the rebels made no attempt to break in during the
broadcast, which leads me to believe they think it's true. if
that's so, we really are on our own.
so, now that we're dead, what's our next move? asks
gale."
isn't it obvious?" no one even knew peeta had
regained consciousness. i don't know how long he's been
watching, but by the look of misery on his face, long enough
to see what happened on the street. how he went mad,
tried to bash my head in, and hurled mitchell into the pod.
he painfully pushes himself up to a sitting position and
directs his words to gale.
our next move...is to kill me.
21
that makes two requests for peeta's death in less than
an hour.
don't be ridiculous, says jackson.
i just murdered a member of our squad! shouts
peeta.
"you pushed him off you. you couldn't have known he
would trigger the net at that exact spot, says finnick, trying"
to calm him.
who cares? he's dead, isn't he? tears begin to run
down peeta's face. "i didn't know. i've never seen myself
like that before. katniss is right. i'm the monster. i'm the
mutt. i'm the one snow has turned into a weapon!"
it's not your fault, peeta, says finnick.
"you can't take me with you. it's only a matter of time
before i kill someone else. peeta looks around at our"
conflicted faces. "maybe you think it's kinder to just dump
me somewhere. let me take my chances. but that's the
same thing as handing me over to the capitol. do you think
you'd be doing me a favor by sending me back to snow?"
peeta. back in snow's hands. tortured and tormented
until no bits of his former self will ever emerge again.
for some reason, the last stanza to "the hanging
tree" starts running through my head. the one where the
man wants his lover dead rather than have her face the evil
that awaits her in the world.
are you, are you
coming to the tree
wear a necklace of rope, side by side with
me.
strange things did happen here
no stranger would it be
if we met up at midnight in the hanging tree.
i'll kill you before that happens, says gale. "i
promise."
peeta hesitates, as if considering the reliability of this
offer, and then shakes his head. "it's no good. what if
you're not there to do it? i want one of those poison pills like
the rest of you have."
nightlock. there's one pill back at camp, in its special
slot on the sleeve of my mockingjay suit. but there's another
in the breast pocket of my uniform. interesting that they
didn't issue one to peeta. perhaps coin thought he might
take it before he had the opportunity to kill me. it's unclear if
peeta means he'd finish himself off now, to spare us having
to murder him, or only if the capitol took him prisoner
again. in the state he's in, i expect it would be sooner rather
than later. it would certainly make things easier on the rest
of us. not to have to shoot him. it would certainly simplify the
problem of dealing with his homicidal episodes.
i don't know if it's the pods, or the fear, or watching
boggs die, but i feel the arena all around me. it's as if i've
never left, really. once again i'm battling not only for my own
survival but for peeta's as well. how satisfying, how
entertaining it would be for snow to have me kill him. to
have peeta's death on my conscience for whatever is left of
my life.
it's not about you, i say. "we're on a mission. and
you're necessary to it." i look to the rest of the group. "think
we might find some food here?"
besides the medical kit and cameras, we have nothing
but our uniforms and our weapons.
half of us stay to guard peeta or keep an eye out for
snow's broadcast, while the others hunt for something to
eat. messalla proves most valuable because he lived in a
near replica of this apartment and knows where people
would be most likely to stash food. like how there's a
storage space concealed by a mirrored panel in the
bedroom, or how easy it is to pop out the ventilation screen
in the hallway. so even though the kitchen cupboards are
bare, we find over thirty canned goods and several boxes
of cookies.
the hoarding disgusts the soldiers raised in 13. "isn't
this illegal?" says leeg 1.
"on the contrary, in the capitol you'd be considered
stupid not to do it, says messalla. ""even before the"
quarter quell, people were starting to stock up on scarce
supplies."
while others went without, says leeg 1.
right, says messalla. "that's how it works here."
fortunately, or we wouldn't have dinner, says gale.
everybody grab a can.
some of our company seem reluctant to do this, but it's
as good a method as any. i'm really not in the mood to divvy
up everything into eleven equal parts, factoring in age, body
weight, and physical output. i poke around in the pile, about
to settle on some cod chowder, when peeta holds out a
can to me. "here."
i take it, not knowing what to expect. the label reads
lamb stew.
i press my lips together at the memories of rain
dripping through stones, my inept attempts at flirting, and
the aroma of my favorite capitol dish in the chilly air. so
some part of it must still be in his head, too. how happy,
how hungry, how close we were when that picnic basket
arrived outside our cave. "thanks." i pop open the top. "it
even has dried plums." i bend the lid and use it as a
makeshift spoon, scooping a bit into my mouth. now this
place tastes like the arena, too.
we're passing around a box of fancy cream-filled
cookies when the beeping starts again. the seal of panem
lights up on the screen and remains there while the anthem
plays. and then they begin to show images of the dead, just
as they did with the tributes in the arena. they start with the
four faces of our tv crew, followed by boggs, gale,
finnick, peeta, and me. except for boggs, they don't
bother with the soldiers from 13, either because they have
no idea who they are or because they know they won't
mean anything to the audience. then the man himself
appears, seated at his desk, a flag draped behind him, the
fresh white rose gleaming in his lapel. i think he might have
recently had more work done, because his lips are puffier
than usual. and his prep team really needs to use a lighter
hand with his blush.
snow congratulates the peacekeepers on a masterful
job, honors them for ridding the country of the menace
called the mockingjay. with my death, he predicts a turning
of the tide in the war, since the demoralized rebels have no
one left to follow. and what was i, really? a poor, unstable
girl with a small talent with a bow and arrow. not a great
thinker, not the mastermind of the rebellion, merely a face
plucked from the rabble because i had caught the nation's
attention with my antics in the games. but necessary, so
very necessary, because the rebels have no real leader
among them.
somewhere in district 13, beetee hits a switch,
because now it's not president snow but president coin
who's looking at us. she introduces herself to panem,
identifies herself as the head of the rebellion, and then
gives my eulogy. praise for the girl who survived the seam
and the hunger games, then turned a country of slaves into
an army of freedom fighters. "dead or alive, katniss
everdeen will remain the face of this rebellion. if ever you
waver in your resolve, think of the mockingjay, and in her
you will find the strength you need to rid panem of its
oppressors."
i had no idea how much i meant to her, i say, which
brings a laugh from gale and questioning looks from the
others.
up comes a heavily doctored photo of me looking
beautiful and fierce with a bunch of flames flickering behind
me. no words. no slogan. my face is all they need now.
beetee gives the reins back to a very controlled snow.
i have the feeling the president thought the emergency
channel was impenetrable, and someone will end up dead
tonight because it was breached. "tomorrow morning,
when we pull katniss everdeen's body from the ashes, we
will see exactly who the mockingjay is. a dead girl who
could save no one, not even herself." seal, anthem, and
out.
except that you won't find her, says finnick to the
empty screen, voicing what we're all probably thinking. the
grace period will be brief. once they dig through those
ashes and come up missing eleven bodies, they'll know we
escaped.
we can get a head start on them at least, i say.
suddenly, i'm so tired. all i want is to lie down on a nearby
green plush sofa and go to sleep. to cocoon myself in a
comforter made of rabbit fur and goose down. instead, i pull
out the holo and insist that jackson talk me through the
most basic commands--which are really about entering the
coordinates of the nearest map grid intersection--so that i
can at least begin to operate the thing myself. as the holo
projects our surroundings, i feel my heart sink even further.
we must be moving closer to crucial targets, because the
number of pods has noticeably increased. how can we
possibly move forward into this bouquet of blinking lights
without detection? we can't. and if we can't, we are
trapped like birds in a net. i decide it's best not to adopt
some sort of superior attitude when i'm with these people.
especially when my eyes keep drifting to that green sofa.
so i say, "any ideas?"
why don't we start by ruling out possibilities, says
finnick. "the street is not a possibility."
the rooftops are just as bad as the street, says leeg
1
"we still might have a chance to withdraw, go back the
way we came, says homes. ""but that would mean a failed"
mission."
a pang of guilt hits me since i've fabricated said
mission. "it was never intended for all of us to go forward.
you just had the misfortune to be with me."
well, that's a moot point. we're with you now, says
jackson. "so, we can't stay put. we can't move up. we
can't move laterally. i think that just leaves one option."
underground, says gale.
underground. which i hate. like mines and tunnels
and 13. underground, where i dread dying, which is stupid
because even if i die aboveground, the next thing they'll do
is bury me underground anyway.
the holo can show subterranean as well as streetlevel
pods. i see that when we go underground the clean,
dependable lines of the street plan are interlaced with a
twisting, turning mess of tunnels. the pods look less
numerous, though.
two doors down, a vertical tube connects our row of
apartments to the tunnels. to reach the tube apartment, we
will need to squeeze through a maintenance shaft that runs
the length of the building. we can enter the shaft through the
back of a closet space on the upper floor.
"okay, then. let's make it look like we've never been
here, i say. we erase all signs of our stay. send the empty"
cans down a trash chute, pocket the full ones for later, flip
sofa cushions smeared with blood, wipe traces of gel from
the tiles. there's no fixing the latch on the front door, but we
lock a second bolt, which will at least keep the door from
swinging open on contact.
finally, there's only peeta to contend with. he plants
himself on the blue sofa, refusing to budge. "i'm not going.
i'll either disclose your position or hurt someone else."
snow's people will find you, says finnick.
then leave me a pill. i'll only take it if i have to, says
peeta.
that's not an option. come along, says jackson.
or you'll what? shoot me? asks peeta.
we'll knock you out and drag you with us, says
homes. "which will both slow us down and endanger us."
stop being noble! i don't care if i die! he turns to me,
pleading now. "katniss, please. don't you see, i want to be
out of this?"
the trouble is, i do see. why can't i just let him go? slip
him a pill, pull the trigger? is it because i care too much
about peeta or too much about letting snow win? have i
turned him into a piece in my private games? that's
despicable, but i'm not sure it's beneath me. if it's true, it
would be kindest to kill peeta here and now. but for better
or worse, i am not motivated by kindness. "we're wasting
time. are you coming voluntarily or do we knock you out?"
peeta buries his face in his hands for a few moments,
then rises to join us.
should we free his hands? asks leeg 1.
no! peeta growls at her, drawing his cuffs in close to
his body.
no, i echo. "but i want the key." jackson passes it
over without a word. i slip it into my pants pocket, where it
clicks against the pearl.
when homes pries open the small metal door to the
maintenance shaft, we encounter another problem. there's
no way the insect shells will be able to fit through the narrow
passage. castor and pollux remove them and detach
emergency backup cameras. each is the size of a shoe
box and probably works about as well. messalla can't think
of anywhere better to hide the bulky shells, so we end up
dumping them in the closet. leaving such an easy trail to
follow frustrates me, but what else can we do?
even going single file, holding our packs and gear out
to the side, it's a tight fit. we sidestep our way past the first
apartment, and break into the second. in this apartment,
one of the bedrooms has a door marked utility instead of a
bathroom. behind the door is the room with the entrance to
the tube.
messalla frowns at the wide circular cover, for a
moment returning to his own fussy world. "it's why no one
ever wants the center unit. workmen coming and going
whenever and no second bath. but the rent's considerably
cheaper." then he notices finnick's amused expression
and adds, "never mind."
the tube cover's simple to unlatch. a wide ladder with
rubber treads on the steps allows for a swift, easy descent
into the bowels of the city. we gather at the foot of the
ladder, waiting for our eyes to adjust to the dim strips of
lights, breathing in the mixture of chemicals, mildew, and
sewage.
pollux, pale and sweaty, reaches out and latches on to
castor's wrist. like he might fall over if there isn't someone
to steady him.
"my brother worked down here after he became an
avox, says castor. of course. who else would they get to"
maintain these dank, evil-smelling passages mined with
pods? "took five years before we were able to buy his way
up to ground level. didn't see the sun once."
under better conditions, on a day with fewer horrors
and more rest, someone would surely know what to say.
instead we all stand there for a long time trying to formulate
a response.
finally, peeta turns to pollux. "well, then you just
became our most valuable asset." castor laughs and
pollux manages a smile.
we're halfway down the first tunnel when i realize what
was so remarkable about the exchange. peeta sounded
like his old self, the one who could always think of the right
thing to say when nobody else could. ironic, encouraging, a
little funny, but not at anyone's expense. i glance back at
him as he trudges along under his guards, gale and
jackson, his eyes fixed on the ground, his shoulders
hunched forward. so dispirited. but for a moment, he was
really here.
peeta called it right. pollux turns out to be worth ten
holos. there is a simple network of wide tunnels that
directly corresponds to the main street plan above,
underlying the major avenues and cross streets. it's called
the transfer, since small trucks use it to deliver goods
around the city. during the day, its many pods are
deactivated, but at night it's a minefield. however, hundreds
of additional passages, utility shafts, train tracks, and
drainage tubes form a multilevel maze. pollux knows details
that would lead to disaster for a newcomer, like which
offshoots might require gas masks or have live wires or
rats the size of beavers. he alerts us to the gush of water
that sweeps through the sewers periodically, anticipates
the time the avoxes will be changing shifts, leads us into
damp, obscure pipes to dodge the nearly silent passage of
cargo trains. most important, he has knowledge of the
cameras. there aren't many down in this gloomy, misty
place, except in the transfer. but we keep well out of their
way.
under pollux's guidance we make good time--
remarkable time, if you compare it to our aboveground
travel. after about six hours, fatigue takes over. it's three in
the morning, so i figure we still have a few hours before our
bodies are discovered missing, they search through the
rubble of the whole block of apartments in case we tried to
escape through the shafts, and the hunt begins.
when i suggest we rest, no one objects. pollux finds a
small, warm room humming with machines loaded with
levers and dials. he holds up his fingers to indicate we
must be gone in four hours. jackson works out a guard
schedule, and, since i'm not on the first shift, i wedge myself
in the tight space between gale and leeg 1 and go right to
sleep.
it seems like only minutes later when jackson shakes
me awake, tells me i'm on watch. it's six o'clock, and in one
hour we must be on our way. jackson tells me to eat a can
of food and keep an eye on pollux, who's insisted on being
on guard the entire night. "he can't sleep down here." i drag
myself into a state of relative alertness, eat a can of potato
and bean stew, and sit against the wall facing the door.
pollux seems wide awake. he's probably been reliving
those five years of imprisonment all night. i get out the holo
and manage to input our grid coordinates and scan the
tunnels. as expected, more pods are registering the closer
we move toward the center of the capitol. for a while,
pollux and i click around on the holo, seeing what traps lie
where. when my head begins to spin, i hand it over to him
and lean back against the wall. i look down at the sleeping
soldiers, crew, and friends, and i wonder how many of us
will ever see the sun again.
when my eyes fall on peeta, whose head rests right by
my feet, i see he's awake. i wish i could read what's going
on in his mind, that i could go in and untangle the mess of
lies. then i settle for something i can accomplish.
have you eaten? i ask. a slight shake of his head
indicates he hasn't. i open a can of chicken and rice soup
and hand it to him, keeping the lid in case he tries to slit his
wrists with it or something. he sits up and tilts the can,
chugging back the soup without really bothering to chew it.
the bottom of the can reflects the lights from the machines,
and i remember something that's been itching at the back
of my mind since yesterday. "peeta, when you asked about
what happened to darius and lavinia, and boggs told you
it was real, you said you thought so. because there was
nothing shiny about it. what did you mean?"
oh. i don't know exactly how to explain it, he tells me.
"in the beginning, everything was just complete confusion.
now i can sort certain things out. i think there's a pattern
emerging. the memories they altered with the tracker
jacker venom have this strange quality about them. like
they're too intense or the images aren't stable. you
remember what it was like when we were stung?"
"trees shattered. there were giant colored butterflies.
i fell in a pit of orange bubbles. i think about it. ""shiny"
orange bubbles."
"right. but nothing about darius or lavinia was like
that. i don't think they'd given me any venom yet, he says."
well, that's good, isn't it? i ask. "if you can separate
the two, then you can figure out what's true."
"yes. and if i could grow wings, i could fly. only people
can't grow wings, he says. ""real or not real?"""
real, i say. "but people don't need wings to survive."
mockingjays do. he finishes the soup and returns the
can to me.
in the fluorescent light, the circles under his eyes look
like bruises. "there's still time. you should sleep."
unresisting, he lies back down, but just stares at the needle
on one of the dials as it twitches from side to side. slowly,
as i would with a wounded animal, my hand stretches out
and brushes a wave of hair from his forehead. he freezes
at my touch, but doesn't recoil. so i continue to gently
smooth back his hair. it's the first time i have voluntarily
touched him since the last arena.
you're still trying to protect me. real or not real, he
whispers.
real, i answer. it seems to require more explanation.
because that's what you and i do. protect each other.
after a minute or so, he drifts off to sleep.
shortly before seven, pollux and i move among the
others, rousing them. there are the usual yawns and sighs
that accompany waking. but my ears are picking up
something else, too. almost like a hissing. perhaps it's only
steam escaping a pipe or the far-off whoosh of one of the
trains....
i hush the group to get a better read on it. there's a
hissing, yes, but it's not one extended sound. more like
multiple exhalations that form words. a single word.
echoing throughout the tunnels. one word. one name.
repeated over and over again.
katniss.
22
the grace period has ended. perhaps snow had them
digging through the night. as soon as the fire died down,
anyway. they found boggs's remains, briefly felt reassured,
and then, as the hours went by without further trophies,
began to suspect. at some point, they realized that they
had been tricked. and president snow can't tolerate being
made to look like a fool. it doesn't matter whether they
tracked us to the second apartment or assumed we went
directly underground. they know we are down here now
and they've unleashed something, a pack of mutts
probably, bent on finding me.
katniss. i jump at the proximity of the sound. look
frantically for its source, bow loaded, seeking a target to hit.
katniss. peeta's lips are barely moving, but there's no
doubt, the name came out of him. just when i thought he
seemed a little better, when i thought he might be inching
his way back to me, here is proof of how deep snow's
poison went. "katniss." peeta's programmed to respond to
the hissing chorus, to join in the hunt. he's beginning to stir.
there's no choice. i position my arrow to penetrate his
brain. he'll barely feel a thing. suddenly, he's sitting up,
eyes wide in alarm, short of breath. "katniss!" he whips his
head toward me but doesn't seem to notice my bow, the
waiting arrow. "katniss! get out of here!"
i hesitate. his voice is alarmed, but not insane. "why?
what's making that sound?"
i don't know. only that it has to kill you, says peeta.
run! get out! go!
after my own moment of confusion, i conclude i do not
have to shoot him. relax my bowstring. take in the anxious
faces around me. "whatever it is, it's after me. it might be a
good time to split up."
but we're your guard, says jackson.
and your crew, adds cressida.
i'm not leaving you, gale says.
i look at the crew, armed with nothing but cameras and
clipboards. and there's finnick with two guns and a trident.
i suggest that he give one of his guns to castor. eject the
blank cartridge from peeta's, load it with a real one, and
arm pollux. since gale and i have our bows, we hand our
guns over to messalla and cressida. there's no time to
show them anything but how to point and pull the trigger, but
in close quarters, that might be enough. it's better than
being defenseless. now the only one without a weapon is
peeta, but anyone whispering my name with a bunch of
mutts doesn't need one anyway.
we leave the room free of everything but our scent.
there's no way to erase that at the moment. i'm guessing
that's how the hissing things are tracking us, because we
haven't left much of a physical trail. the mutts' noses will be
abnormally keen, but possibly the time we spent slogging
through water in drainpipes will help throw them.
outside the hum of the room, the hissing becomes
more distinct. but it's also possible to get a better sense of
the mutts' location. they're behind us, still a fair distance.
snow probably had them released underground near the
place where he found boggs's body. theoretically, we
should have a good lead on them, although they're certain
to be much faster than we are. my mind wanders to the
wolflike creatures in the first arena, the monkeys in the
quarter quell, the monstrosities i've witnessed on television
over the years, and i wonder what form these mutts will
take. whatever snow thinks will scare me the most.
pollux and i have worked out a plan for the next leg of
our journey, and since it heads away from the hissing, i see
no reason to alter it. if we move swiftly, maybe we can
reach snow's mansion before the mutts reach us. but
there's a sloppiness that comes with speed: the poorly
placed boot that results in a splash, the accidental clang of
a gun against a pipe, even my own commands, issued too
loudly for discretion.
we've covered about three more blocks via an
overflow pipe and a section of neglected train track when
the screams begin. thick, guttural. bouncing off the tunnel
walls.
avoxes, says peeta immediately. "that's what
darius sounded like when they tortured him."
the mutts must have found them, says cressida.
so they're not just after katniss, says leeg 1.
"they'll probably kill anyone. it's just that they won't stop
until they get to her, says gale. after his hours studying"
with beetee, he is most likely right.
and here i am again. with people dying because of
me. friends, allies, complete strangers, losing their lives for
the mockingjay. "let me go on alone. lead them off. i'll
transfer the holo to jackson. the rest of you can finish the
mission."
no one's going to agree to that! says jackson in
exasperation.
we're wasting time! says finnick.
listen, peeta whispers.
the screams have stopped, and in their absence my
name has rebounded, startling in its proximity. it's below as
well as behind us now. "katniss."
i nudge pollux on the shoulder and we start to run.
trouble is, we had planned to descend to a lower level, but
that's out now. when we come to the steps leading down,
pollux and i are scanning for a possible alternative on the
holo when i start gagging.
masks on! orders jackson.
there's no need for masks. everyone is breathing the
same air. i'm the only one losing my stew because i'm the
only one reacting to the odor. drifting up from the stairwell.
cutting through the sewage. roses. i begin to tremble.
i swerve away from the smell and stumble right out
onto the transfer. smooth, pastel-colored tiled streets, just
like the ones above, but bordered by white brick walls
instead of homes. a roadway where delivery vehicles can
drive with ease, without the congestion of the capitol.
empty now, of everything but us. i swing up my bow and
blow up the first pod with an explosive arrow, which kills the
nest of flesh-eating rats inside. then i sprint for the next
intersection, where i know one false step will cause the
ground beneath our feet to disintegrate, feeding us into
something labeled meat grinder. i shout a warning to the
others to stay with me. i plan for us to skirt around the
corner and then detonate the meat grinder, but another
unmarked pod lies in wait.
it happens silently. i would miss it entirely if finnick
didn't pull me to a stop. "katniss!"
i whip back around, arrow poised for flight, but what
can be done? two of gale's arrows already lie useless
beside the wide shaft of golden light that radiates from
ceiling to floor. inside, messalla is as still as a statue,
poised up on the ball of one foot, head tilted back, held
captive by the beam. i can't tell if he's yelling, although his
mouth is stretched wide. we watch, utterly helpless, as the
flesh melts off his body like candle wax.
can't help him! peeta starts shoving people forward.
can't! amazingly, he's the only one still functional enough
to get us moving. i don't know why he's in control, when he
should be flipping out and bashing my brains in, but that
could happen any second. at the pressure of his hand
against my shoulder, i turn away from the grisly thing that
was messalla; i make my feet go forward, fast, so fast that i
can barely skid to a stop before the next intersection.
a spray of gunfire brings down a shower of plaster. i
jerk my head from side to side, looking for the pod, before i
turn and see the squad of peacekeepers pounding down
the transfer toward us. with the meat grinder pod blocking
our way, there's nothing to do but fire back. they outnumber
us two to one, but we've still got six original members of the
star squad, who aren't trying to run and shoot at the same
time.
fish in a barrel, i think, as blossoms of red stain their
white uniforms. three-quarters of them are down and dead
when more begin to pour in from the side of the tunnel, the
same one i flung myself through to get away from the smell,
from the--
those aren't peacekeepers.
they are white, four-limbed, about the size of a fullgrown
human, but that's where the comparisons stop.
naked, with long reptilian tails, arched backs, and heads
that jut forward. they swarm over the peacekeepers, living
and dead, clamp on to their necks with their mouths and rip
off the helmeted heads. apparently, having a capitol
pedigree is as useless here as it was in 13. it seems to
take only seconds before the peacekeepers are
decapitated. the mutts fall to their bellies and skitter toward
us on all fours.
this way! i shout, hugging the wall and making a
sharp right turn to avoid the pod. when everyone's joined
me, i fire into the intersection, and the meat grinder
activates. huge mechanical teeth burst through the street
and chew the tile to dust. that should make it impossible
for the mutts to follow us, but i don't know. the wolf and
monkey mutts i've encountered could leap unbelievably far.
the hissing burns my ears, and the reek of roses
makes the walls spin.
i grab pollux's arm. "forget the mission. what's the
quickest way aboveground?"
there's no time for checking the holo. we follow pollux
for about ten yards along the transfer and go through a
doorway. i'm aware of tile changing to concrete, of crawling
through a tight, stinking pipe onto a ledge about a foot
wide. we're in the main sewer. a yard below, a poisonous
brew of human waste, garbage, and chemical runoff
bubbles by us. parts of the surface are on fire, others emit
evil-looking clouds of vapor. one look tells you that if you fall
in, you're never coming out. moving as quickly as we dare
on the slippery ledge, we make our way to a narrow bridge
and cross it. in an alcove at the far side, pollux smacks a
ladder with his hand and points up the shaft. this is it. our
way out.
a quick glance at our party tells me something's off.
wait! where are jackson and leeg one?
they stayed at the grinder to hold the mutts back,
says homes.
what? i'm lunging back for the bridge, willing to leave
no one to those monsters, when he yanks me back.
"don't waste their lives, katniss. it's too late for them.
look! homes nods to the pipe, where the mutts are"
slithering onto the ledge.
stand back! gale shouts. with his explosive-tipped
arrows, he rips the far side of the bridge from its
foundation. the rest sinks into the bubbles, just as the mutts
reach it.
for the first time, i get a good look at them. a mix of
human and lizard and who knows what else. white, tight
reptilian skin smeared with gore, clawed hands and feet,
their faces a mess of conflicting features. hissing, shrieking
my name now, as their bodies contort in rage. lashing out
with tails and claws, taking huge chunks of one another or
their own bodies with wide, lathered mouths, driven mad by
their need to destroy me. my scent must be as evocative to
them as theirs is to me. more so, because despite its
toxicity, the mutts begin to throw themselves into the foul
sewer.
along our bank, everyone opens fire. i choose my
arrows without discretion, sending arrowheads, fire,
explosives into the mutts' bodies. they're mortal, but only
just. no natural thing could keep coming with two dozen
bullets in it. yes, we can eventually kill them, only there are
so many, an endless supply pouring from the pipe, not even
hesitating to take to the sewage.
but it's not their numbers that make my hands shake
so.
no mutt is good. all are meant to damage you. some
take your life, like the monkeys. others your reason, like the
tracker jackers. however, the true atrocities, the most
frightening, incorporate a perverse psychological twist
designed to terrify the victim. the sight of the wolf mutts
with the dead tributes' eyes. the sound of the jabberjays
replicating prim's tortured screams. the smell of snow's
roses mixed with the victims' blood. carried across the
sewer. cutting through even this foulness. making my heart
run wild, my skin turn to ice, my lungs unable to suck air. it's
as if snow's breathing right in my face, telling me it's time to
die.
the others are shouting at me, but i can't seem to
respond. strong arms lift me as i blast the head off a mutt
whose claws have just grazed my ankle. i'm slammed into
the ladder. hands shoved against the rungs. ordered to
climb. my wooden, puppet limbs obey. movement slowly
brings me back to my senses. i detect one person above
me. pollux. peeta and cressida are below. we reach a
platform. switch to a second ladder. rungs slick with sweat
and mildew. at the next platform, my head has cleared and
the reality of what's happened hits me. i begin frantically
pulling people up off the ladder. peeta. cressida. that's it.
what have i done? what have i abandoned the others
to? i'm scrambling back down the ladder when one of my
boots kicks someone.
climb! gale barks at me. i'm back up, hauling him in,
peering into the gloom for more. "no." gale turns my face
to him and shakes his head. uniform shredded. gaping
wound in the side of his neck.
there's a human cry from below. "someone's still
alive," i plead.
no, katniss. they're not coming, says gale. "only the
mutts are."
unable to accept it, i shine the light from cressida's
gun down the shaft. far below, i can just make out finnick,
struggling to hang on as three mutts tear at him. as one
yanks back his head to take the death bite, something
bizarre happens. it's as if i'm finnick, watching images of
my life flash by. the mast of a boat, a silver parachute,
mags laughing, a pink sky, beetee's trident, annie in her
wedding dress, waves breaking over rocks. then it's over.
i slide the holo from my belt and choke out "nightlock,
nightlock, nightlock." release it. hunch against the wall with
the others as the explosion rocks the platform and bits of
mutt and human flesh shoot out of the pipe and shower us.
there's a clank as pollux slams a cover over the pipe
and locks it in place. pollux, gale, cressida, peeta, and
me. we're all that's left. later, the human feelings will come.
now i'm conscious only of an animal need to keep the
remnants of our band alive. "we can't stop here."
someone comes up with a bandage. we tie it around
gale's neck. get him to his feet. only one figure stays
huddled against the wall. "peeta," i say. there's no
response. has he blacked out? i crouch in front of him,
pulling his cuffed hands from his face. "peeta?" his eyes
are like black pools, the pupils dilated so that the blue
irises have all but vanished. the muscles in his wrists are
hard as metal.
leave me, he whispers. "i can't hang on."
yes. you can! i tell him.
peeta shakes his head. "i'm losing it. i'll go mad. like
them."
like the mutts. like a rabid beast bent on ripping my
throat out. and here, finally here in this place, in these
circumstances, i will really have to kill him. and snow will
win. hot, bitter hatred courses through me. snow has won
too much already today.
it's a long shot, it's suicide maybe, but i do the only
thing i can think of. i lean in and kiss peeta full on the mouth.
his whole body starts shuddering, but i keep my lips
pressed to his until i have to come up for air. my hands
slide up his wrists to clasp his. "don't let him take you from
me."
peeta's panting hard as he fights the nightmares
raging in his head. "no. i don't want to..."
i clench his hands to the point of pain. "stay with me."
his pupils contract to pinpoints, dilate again rapidly,
and then return to something resembling normalcy.
always, he murmurs.
i help peeta up and address pollux. "how far to the
street?" he indicates it's just above us. i climb the last
ladder and push open the lid to someone's utility room. i'm
rising to my feet when a woman throws open the door. she
wears a bright turquoise silk robe embroidered with exotic
birds. her magenta hair's fluffed up like a cloud and
decorated with gilded butterflies. grease from the halfeaten
sausage she's holding smears her lipstick. the
expression on her face says she recognizes me. she
opens her mouth to call for help.
without hesitation, i shoot her through the heart.
23
who the woman was calling to remains a mystery,
because after searching the apartment, we find she was
alone. perhaps her cry was meant for a nearby neighbor, or
was simply an expression of fear. at any rate, there's no
one else to hear her.
this apartment would be a classy place to hole up in
for a while, but that's a luxury we can't afford. "how long do
you think we have before they figure out some of us
could've survived?" i ask.
i think they could be here anytime, gale answers.
"they knew we were heading for the streets. probably the
explosion will throw them for a few minutes, then they'll start
looking for our exit point."
i go to a window that overlooks the street, and when i
peek through the blinds, i'm not faced with peacekeepers
but with a bundled crowd of people going about their
business. during our underground journey, we have left the
evacuated zones far behind and surfaced in a busy section
of the capitol. this crowd offers our only chance of escape.
i don't have a holo, but i have cressida. she joins me at the
window, confirms she knows our location, and gives me the
good news that we aren't many blocks from the president's
mansion.
one glance at my companions tells me this is no time
for a stealth attack on snow. gale's still losing blood from
the neck wound, which we haven't even cleaned. peeta's
sitting on a velvet sofa with his teeth clamped down on a
pillow, either fighting off madness or containing a scream.
pollux weeps against the mantel of an ornate fireplace.
cressida stands determinedly at my side, but she's so pale
her lips are bloodless. i'm running on hate. when the energy
for that ebbs, i'll be worthless.
let's check her closets, i say.
in one bedroom we find hundreds of the woman's
outfits, coats, pairs of shoes, a rainbow of wigs, enough
makeup to paint a house. in a bedroom across the hall,
there's a similar selection for men. perhaps they belong to
her husband. perhaps to a lover who had the good luck to
be out this morning.
i call the others to dress. at the sight of peeta's bloody
wrists, i dig in my pocket for the handcuff key, but he jerks
away from me.
no, he says. "don't. they help hold me together."
you might need your hands, says gale.
"when i feel myself slipping, i dig my wrists into them,
and the pain helps me focus, says peeta. i let them be."
fortunately, it's cold out, so we can conceal most of
our uniforms and weapons under flowing coats and cloaks.
we hang our boots around our necks by their laces and
hide them, pull on silly shoes to replace them. the real
challenge, of course, is our faces. cressida and pollux run
the risk of being recognized by acquaintances, gale could
be familiar from the propos and news, and peeta and i are
known by every citizen of panem. we hastily help one
another apply thick layers of makeup, pull on wigs and
sunglasses. cressida wraps scarves over peeta's and my
mouths and noses.
i can feel the clock ticking away, but stop for just a few
moments to stuff pockets with food and first-aid supplies.
stay together, i say at the front door. then we march right
into the street. snow flurries have begun to fall. agitated
people swirl around us, speaking of rebels and hunger and
me in their affected capitol accents. we cross the street,
pass a few more apartments. just as we turn the corner,
three dozen peacekeepers sweep past us. we hop out of
their way, as the real citizens do, wait until the crowd returns
to its normal flow, and keep moving. "cressida," i whisper.
can you think of anywhere?
i'm trying, she says.
we cover another block, and the sirens begin. through
an apartment window, i see an emergency report and
pictures of our faces flashing. they haven't identified who in
our party died yet, because i see castor and finnick
among the photos. soon every passerby will be as
dangerous as a peacekeeper. "cressida?"
there's one place. it's not ideal. but we can try it, she
says. we follow her a few more blocks and turn through a
gate into what looks like a private residence. it's some kind
of shortcut, though, because after walking through a
manicured garden, we come out of another gate onto a
small back street that connects two main avenues. there
are a few poky stores--one that buys used goods, another
that sells fake jewelry. only a couple of people are around,
and they pay no attention to us. cressida begins to babble
in a high-pitched voice about fur undergarments, how
essential they are during the cold months. "wait until you
see the prices! believe me, it's half what you pay on the
avenues!"
we stop before a grimy storefront filled with
mannequins in furry underwear. the place doesn't even
look open, but cressida pushes through the front door,
setting off a dissonant chiming. inside the dim, narrow shop
lined with racks of merchandise, the smell of pelts fills my
nose. business must be slow, since we're the only
customers. cressida heads straight for a hunched figure
sitting in the back. i follow, trailing my fingers through the
soft garments as we go.
behind a counter sits the strangest person i've ever
seen. she's an extreme example of surgical enhancement
gone wrong, for surely not even in the capitol could they
find this face attractive. the skin has been pulled back
tightly and tattooed with black and gold stripes. the nose
has been flattened until it barely exists. i've seen cat
whiskers on people in the capitol before, but none so long.
the result is a grotesque, semi-feline mask, which now
squints at us distrustfully.
cressida takes off her wig, revealing her vines.
tigris, she says. "we need help."
tigris. deep in my brain, the name rings a bell. she
was a fixture--a younger, less disturbing version of herself--
in the earliest hunger games i can remember. a stylist, i
think. i don't remember for which district. not 12. then she
must have had one operation too many and crossed the
line into repellence.
so this is where stylists go when they've outlived their
use. to sad theme underwear shops where they wait for
death. out of the public eye.
i stare at her face, wondering if her parents actually
named her tigris, inspiring her mutilation, or if she chose
the style and changed her name to match her stripes.
plutarch said you could be trusted, adds cressida.
great, she's one of plutarch's people. so if her first
move isn't to turn us in to the capitol, it will be to notify
plutarch, and by extension coin, of our whereabouts. no,
tigris's shop is not ideal, but it's all we have at the moment.
if she'll even help us. she's peering between an old
television on her counter and us, as if trying to place us. to
help her, i pull down my scarf, remove my wig, and step
closer so that the light of the screen falls on my face.
tigris gives a low growl, not unlike one buttercup might
greet me with. she slinks down off her stool and
disappears behind a rack of fur-lined leggings. there's a
sound of sliding, and then her hand emerges and waves us
forward. cressida looks at me, as if to ask are you sure?
but what choice do we have? returning to the streets under
these conditions guarantees our capture or death. i push
around the furs and find tigris has slid back a panel at the
base of the wall. behind it seems to be the top of a steep
stone stairway. she gestures for me to enter.
everything about the situation screams trap. i have a
moment of panic and find myself turning to tigris, searching
those tawny eyes. why is she doing this? she's no cinna,
someone willing to sacrifice herself for others. this woman
was the embodiment of capitol shallowness. she was one
of the stars of the hunger games until...until she wasn't. so
is that it, then? bitterness? hatred? revenge? actually, i'm
comforted by the idea. a need for revenge can burn long
and hot. especially if every glance in a mirror reinforces it.
did snow ban you from the games? i ask. she just
stares back at me. somewhere her tiger tail flicks with
displeasure. "because i'm going to kill him, you know." her
mouth spreads into what i take for a smile. reassured that
this isn't complete madness, i crawl through the space.
about halfway down the steps, my face runs into a
hanging chain and i pull it, illuminating the hideout with a
flickering fluorescent bulb. it's a small cellar with no doors or
windows. shallow and wide. probably just a strip between
two real basements. a place whose existence could go
unnoticed unless you had a very keen eye for dimensions.
it's cold and dank, with piles of pelts that i'm guessing
haven't seen the light of day in years. unless tigris gives us
up, i don't believe anyone will find us here. by the time i
reach the concrete floor, my companions are on the steps.
the panel slides back in place. i hear the underwear rack
being adjusted on squeaky wheels. tigris padding back to
her stool. we have been swallowed up by her store.
just in time, too, because gale looks on the verge of
collapse. we make a bed of pelts, strip off his layers of
weapons, and help him onto his back. at the end of the
cellar, there's a faucet about a foot from the floor with a
drain under it. i turn the tap and, after much sputtering and a
lot of rust, clear water begins to flow. we clean gale's neck
wound and i realize bandages won't be enough. he's going
to need a few stitches. there's a needle and sterile thread
in the first-aid supplies, but what we lack is a healer. it
crosses my mind to enlist tigris. as a stylist, she must
know how to work a needle. but that would leave no one
manning the shop, and she's doing enough already. i
accept that i'm probably the most qualified for the job, grit
my teeth, and put in a row of jagged sutures. it's not pretty
but it's functional. i smear it with medicine and wrap it up.
give him some painkillers. "you can rest now. it's safe
here," i tell him. he goes out like a light.
while cressida and pollux make fur nests for each of
us, i attend to peeta's wrists. gently rinsing away the blood,
putting on an antiseptic, and bandaging them beneath the
cuffs. "you've got to keep them clean, otherwise the
infection could spread and--"
i know what blood poisoning is, katniss, says peeta.
even if my mother isn't a healer.
i'm jolted back in time, to another wound, another set of
bandages. "you said that same thing to me in the first
hunger games. real or not real?"
real, he says. "and you risked your life getting the
medicine that saved me?"
real. i shrug. "you were the reason i was alive to do
it."
was i? the comment throws him into confusion.
some shiny memory must be fighting for his attention,
because his body tenses and his newly bandaged wrists
strain against the metal cuffs. then all the energy saps from
his body. "i'm so tired, katniss."
go to sleep, i say. he won't until i've rearranged his
handcuffs and shackled him to one of the stair supports. it
can't be comfortable, lying there with his arms above his
head. but in a few minutes, he drifts off, too.
cressida and pollux have made beds for us, arranged
our food and medical supplies, and now ask what i want to
do about setting up a guard. i look at gale's pallor, peeta's
restraints. pollux hasn't slept for days, and cressida and i
only napped for a few hours. if a troop of peacekeepers
were to come through that door, we'd be trapped like rats.
we are completely at the mercy of a decrepit tiger-woman
with what i can only hope is an all-consuming passion for
snow's death.
"i don't honestly think there's any point in setting up a
guard. let's just try to get some sleep, i say. they nod"
numbly, and we all burrow into our pelts. the fire inside me
has flickered out, and with it my strength. i surrender to the
soft, musty fur and oblivion.
i have only one dream i remember. a long and
wearying thing in which i'm trying to get to district 12. the
home i'm seeking is intact, the people alive. effie trinket,
conspicuous in a bright pink wig and tailored outfit, travels
with me. i keep trying to ditch her in places, but she
inexplicably reappears at my side, insisting that as my
escort she's responsible for my staying on schedule. only
the schedule is constantly shifting, derailed by our lack of a
stamp from an official or delayed when effie breaks one of
her high heels. we camp for days on a bench in a gray
station in district 7, awaiting a train that never comes.
when i wake, somehow i feel even more drained by this
than my usual nighttime forays into blood and terror.
cressida, the only person awake, tells me it's late
afternoon. i eat a can of beef stew and wash it down with a
lot of water. then i lean against the cellar wall, retracing the
events of the last day. moving death by death. counting
them up on my fingers. one, two--mitchell and boggs lost
on the block. three--messalla melted by the pod. four, five-
-leeg 1 and jackson sacrificing themselves at the meat
grinder. six, seven, eight--castor, homes, and finnick
being decapitated by the rose-scented lizard mutts. eight
dead in twenty-four hours. i know it happened, and yet it
doesn't seem real. surely, castor is asleep under that pile
of furs, finnick will come bounding down the steps in a
minute, boggs will tell me his plan for our escape.
to believe them dead is to accept i killed them. okay,
maybe not mitchell and boggs--they died on an actual
assignment. but the others lost their lives defending me on
a mission i fabricated. my plot to assassinate snow seems
so stupid now. so stupid as i sit shivering here in this cellar,
tallying up our losses, fingering the tassels on the silver
knee-high boots i stole from the woman's home. oh, yeah--i
forgot about that. i killed her, too. i'm taking out unarmed
citizens now.
i think it's time i give myself up.
when everyone finally awakens, i confess. how i lied
about the mission, how i jeopardized everyone in pursuit of
revenge. there's a long silence after i finish. then gale
says, "katniss, we all knew you were lying about coin
sending you to assassinate snow."
you knew, maybe. the soldiers from thirteen didn't, i
reply."
do you really think jackson believed you had orders
from coin?" cressida asks. "of course she didn't. but she
trusted boggs, and he'd clearly wanted you to go on."
i never even told boggs what i planned to do, i say.
you told everyone in command! gale says. "it was
one of your conditions for being the mockingjay. 'i kill
snow.'"
those seem like two disconnected things. negotiating
with coin for the privilege of executing snow after the war
and this unauthorized flight through the capitol. "but not like
this," i say. "it's been a complete disaster."
"i think it would be considered a highly successful
mission, says gale. ""we've infiltrated the enemy camp,"
showing that the capitol's defenses can be breached.
we've managed to get footage of ourselves all over the
capitol's news. we've thrown the whole city into chaos
trying to find us."
trust me, plutarch's thrilled, cressida adds.
that's because plutarch doesn't care who dies, i say.
not as long as his games are a success.
cressida and gale go round and round trying to
convince me. pollux nods at their words to back them up.
only peeta doesn't offer an opinion.
what do you think, peeta? i finally ask him.
"i think...you still have no idea. the effect you can
have. he slides his cuffs up the support and pushes"
himself to a sitting position. "none of the people we lost
were idiots. they knew what they were doing. they followed
you because they believed you really could kill snow."
i don't know why his voice reaches me when no one
else's can. but if he's right, and i think he is, i owe the others
a debt that can only be repaid in one way. i pull my paper
map from a pocket in my uniform and spread it out on the
floor with new resolve. "where are we, cressida?"
tigris's shop sits about five blocks from the city circle
and snow's mansion. we're in easy walking distance
through a zone in which the pods are deactivated for the
residents' safety. we have disguises that, perhaps with
some embellishments from tigris's furry stock, could get us
safely there. but then what? the mansion's sure to be
heavily guarded, under round-the-clock camera
surveillance, and laced with pods that could become live at
the flick of a switch.
what we need is to get him out in the open, gale
says to me. "then one of us could pick him off."
does he ever appear in public anymore? asks
peeta.
i don't think so, says cressida. "at least in all the
recent speeches i've seen, he's been in the mansion. even
before the rebels got here. i imagine he became more
vigilant after finnick aired his crimes."
that's right. it's not just the tigrises of the capitol who
hate snow now, but a web of people who know what he did
to their friends and families. it would have to be something
bordering on miraculous to lure him out. something like...
i bet he'd come out for me, i say. "if i were captured.
he'd want that as public as possible. he'd want my
execution on his front steps." i let this sink in. "then gale
could shoot him from the audience."
no. peeta shakes his head. "there are too many
alternative endings to that plan. snow might decide to keep
you and torture information out of you. or have you
executed publicly without being present. or kill you inside
the mansion and display your body out front."
gale? i say.
"it seems like an extreme solution to jump to
immediately, he says. ""maybe if all else fails. let's keep"
thinking."
in the quiet that follows, we hear tigris's soft footfall
overhead. it must be closing time. she's locking up,
fastening the shutters maybe. a few minutes later, the panel
at the top of the stairs slides open.
come up, says a gravelly voice. "i have some food
for you." it's the first time she's talked since we arrived.
whether it's natural or from years of practice, i don't know,
but there's something in her manner of speaking that
suggests a cat's purr.
as we climb the stairs, cressida asks, "did you
contact plutarch, tigris?"
no way to. tigris shrugs. "he'll figure out you're in a
safe house. don't worry."
worry? i feel immensely relieved by the news that i
won't be given--and have to ignore--direct orders from 13.
or make up some viable defense for the decisions i've
made over the last couple of days.
in the shop, the counter holds some stale hunks of
bread, a wedge of moldy cheese, and half a bottle of
mustard. it reminds me that not everyone in the capitol has
full stomachs these days. i feel obliged to tell tigris about
our remaining food supplies, but she waves my objections
away. "i eat next to nothing," she says. "and then, only raw
meat." this seems a little too in character, but i don't
question it. i just scrape the mold off the cheese and divide
up the food among the rest of us.
while we eat, we watch the latest capitol news
coverage. the government has the rebel survivors
narrowed down to the five of us. huge bounties are offered
for information leading to our capture. they emphasize how
dangerous we are. show us exchanging gunfire with the
peacekeepers, although not the mutts ripping off their
heads. do a tragic tribute to the woman lying where we left
her, with my arrow still in her heart. someone has redone
her makeup for the cameras.
the rebels let the capitol broadcast run on
uninterrupted. "have the rebels made a statement today?" i
ask tigris. she shakes her head. "i doubt coin knows what
to do with me now that i'm still alive."
tigris gives a throaty cackle. "no one knows what to
do with you, girlie." then she makes me take a pair of the
fur leggings even though i can't pay her for them. it's the
kind of gift you have to accept. and anyway, it's cold in that
cellar.downstairs after supper, we continue to rack our
brains for a plan. nothing good comes up, but we do agree
that we can no longer go out as a group of five and that we
should try to infiltrate the president's mansion before i turn
myself into bait. i consent to that second point to avoid
further argument. if i do decide to give myself up, it won't
require anyone else's permission or participation.
we change bandages, handcuff peeta back to his
support, and settle down to sleep. a few hours later, i slip
back into consciousness and become aware of a quiet
conversation. peeta and gale. i can't stop myself from
eavesdropping.
thanks for the water, peeta says.
no problem, gale replies. "i wake up ten times a
night anyway."
to make sure katniss is still here? asks peeta.
something like that, gale admits.
there's a long pause before peeta speaks again.
"that was funny, what tigris said. about no one knowing
what to do with her."
well, we never have, gale says.
they both laugh. it's so strange to hear them talking
like this. almost like friends. which they're not. never have
been. although they're not exactly enemies.
she loves you, you know, says peeta. "she as good
as told me after they whipped you."
don't believe it, gale answers. "the way she kissed
you in the quarter quell...well, she never kissed me like
that."
it was just part of the show, peeta tells him, although
there's an edge of doubt in his voice.
"no, you won her over. gave up everything for her.
maybe that's the only way to convince her you love her."
there's a long pause. "i should have volunteered to take
your place in the first games. protected her then."
you couldn't, says peeta. "she'd never have forgiven
you. you had to take care of her family. they matter more to
her than her life."
"well, it won't be an issue much longer. i think it's
unlikely all three of us will be alive at the end of the war. and
if we are, i guess it's katniss's problem. who to choose."
gale yawns. "we should get some sleep."
yeah. i hear peeta's handcuffs slide down the
support as he settles in. "i wonder how she'll make up her
mind."
oh, that i do know. i can just catch gale's last words
through the layer of fur. "katniss will pick whoever she
thinks she can't survive without."
24
a chill runs through me. am i really that cold and
calculating? gale didn't say, "katniss will pick whoever it
will break her heart to give up," or even "whoever she can't
live without." those would have implied i was motivated by
a kind of passion. but my best friend predicts i will choose
the person who i think i "can't survive without." there's not
the least indication that love, or desire, or even
compatibility will sway me. i'll just conduct an unfeeling
assessment of what my potential mates can offer me. as if
in the end, it will be the question of whether a baker or a
hunter will extend my longevity the most. it's a horrible thing
for gale to say, for peeta not to refute. especially when
every emotion i have has been taken and exploited by the
capitol or the rebels. at the moment, the choice would be
simple. i can survive just fine without either of them.
in the morning, i have no time or energy to nurse
wounded feelings. during a predawn breakfast of liver pate
and fig cookies, we gather around tigris's television for
one of beetee's break-ins. there's been a new
development in the war. apparently inspired by the black
wave, some enterprising rebel commander came up with
the idea of confiscating people's abandoned automobiles
and sending them unmanned down the streets. the cars
don't trigger every pod, but they certainly get the majority. at
around four in the morning, the rebels began carving three
separate paths--simply referred to as the a, b, and c lines-
-to the capitol's heart. as a result, they've secured block
after block with very few casualties.
this can't last, says gale. "in fact i'm surprised
they've kept it going so long. the capitol will adjust by
deactivating specific pods and then manually triggering
them when their targets come in range." almost within
minutes of his prediction, we see this very thing happen onscreen.
a squad sends a car down a block, setting off four
pods. all seems well. three scouts follow and make it
safely to the end of the street. but when a group of twenty
rebel soldiers follow them, they're blown to bits by a row of
potted rosebushes in front of a flower shop.
"i bet it's killing plutarch not to be in the control room
on this one, says peeta."
beetee gives the broadcast back to the capitol, where
a grim-faced reporter announces the blocks that civilians
are to evacuate. between her update and the previous
story, i am able to mark my paper map to show the relative
positions of the opposing armies.
i hear scuffling out on the street, move to the windows,
and peek out a crack in the shutters. in the early morning
light, i see a bizarre spectacle. refugees from the now
occupied blocks are streaming toward the capitol's center.
the most panicked are wearing nothing but nightgowns
and slippers, while the more prepared are heavily bundled
in layers of clothes. they carry everything from lapdogs to
jewelry boxes to potted plants. one man in a fluffy robe
holds only an overripe banana. confused, sleepy children
stumble along after their parents, most either too stunned or
too baffled to cry. bits of them flash by my line of vision. a
pair of wide brown eyes. an arm clutching a favorite doll. a
pair of bare feet, bluish in the cold, catching on the uneven
paving stones of the alley. seeing them reminds me of the
children of 12 who died fleeing the firebombs. i leave the
window.
tigris offers to be our spy for the day since she's the
only one of us without a bounty on her head. after securing
us downstairs, she goes out into the capitol to pick up any
helpful information.
down in the cellar i pace back and forth, driving the
others crazy. something tells me that not taking advantage
of the flood of refugees is a mistake. what better cover
could we have? on the other hand, every displaced person
milling about on the streets means another pair of eyes
looking for the five rebels on the loose. then again, what do
we gain by staying here? all we're really doing is depleting
our small cache of food and waiting for...what? the rebels
to take the capitol? it could be weeks before that happens,
and i'm not so sure what i'd do if they did. not run out and
greet them. coin would have me whisked back to 13
before i could say "nightlock, nightlock, nightlock." i did not
come all this way, and lose all those people, to turn myself
over to that woman. i kill snow. besides, there would be an
awful lot of things i couldn't easily explain about the last few
days. several of which, if they came to light, would probably
blow my deal for the victors' immunity right out of the water.
and forget about me, i've got a feeling some of the others
are going to need it. like peeta. who, no matter how you
spin it, can be seen on tape tossing mitchell into that net
pod. i can imagine what coin's war tribunal will do with that.
by late afternoon, we're beginning to get uneasy about
tigris's long absence. talk turns to the possibilities that she
has been apprehended and arrested, turned us in
voluntarily, or simply been injured in the wave of refugees.
but around six o'clock we hear her return. there's some
shuffling around upstairs, then she opens the panel. the
wonderful smell of frying meat fills the air. tigris has
prepared us a hash of chopped ham and potatoes. it's the
first hot food we've had in days, and as i wait for her to fill
my plate, i'm in danger of actually drooling.
as i chew, i try to pay attention to tigris telling us how
she acquired it, but the main thing i absorb is that fur
underwear is a valuable trading item at the moment.
especially for people who left their homes underdressed.
many are still out on the street, trying to find shelter for the
night. those who live in the choice apartments of the inner
city have not flung open their doors to house the displaced.
on the contrary, most of them bolted their locks, drew their
shutters, and pretended to be out. now the city circle's
packed with refugees, and the peacekeepers are going
door to door, breaking into places if they have to, to assign
houseguests.
on the television, we watch a terse head
peacekeeper lay out specific rules regarding how many
people per square foot each resident will be expected to
take in. he reminds the citizens of the capitol that
temperatures will drop well below freezing tonight and
warns them that their president expects them to be not only
willing but enthusiastic hosts in this time of crisis. then they
show some very staged-looking shots of concerned
citizens welcoming grateful refugees into their homes. the
head peacekeeper says the president himself has ordered
part of his mansion readied to receive citizens tomorrow.
he adds that shopkeepers should also be prepared to lend
their floor space if requested.
tigris, that could be you, says peeta. i realize he's
right. that even this narrow hallway of a shop could be
appropriated as the numbers swell. then we'll be truly
trapped in the cellar, in constant danger of discovery. how
many days do we have? one? maybe two?
the head peacekeeper comes back with more
instructions for the population. it seems that this evening
there was an unfortunate incident where a crowd beat to
death a young man who resembled peeta. henceforth, all
rebel sightings are to be reported immediately to
authorities, who will deal with the identification and arrest of
the suspect. they show a photo of the victim. apart from
some obviously bleached curls, he looks about as much
like peeta as i do.
people have gone wild, cressida murmurs.
we watch a brief rebel update in which we learn that
several more blocks have been taken today. i make note of
the intersections on my map and study it. "line c is only
four blocks from here," i announce. somehow that fills me
with more anxiety than the idea of peacekeepers looking
for housing. i become very helpful. "let me wash the
dishes."
i'll give you a hand. gale collects the plates.
i feel peeta's eyes follow us out of the room. in the
cramped kitchen at the back of tigris's shop, i fill the sink
with hot water and suds. "do you think it's true?" i ask. "that
snow will let refugees into the mansion?"
i think he has to now, at least for the cameras, says
gale."
i'm leaving in the morning," i say.
i'm going with you, gale says. "what should we do
with the others?"
"pollux and cressida could be useful. they're good
guides, i say. pollux and cressida aren't actually the"
problem. "but peeta's too..."
unpredictable, finishes gale. "do you think he'd still
let us leave him behind?"
we can make the argument that he'll endanger us, i
say. "he might stay here, if we're convincing."
peeta's fairly rational about our suggestion. he readily
agrees that his company could put the other four of us at
risk. i'm thinking this may all work out, that he can just sit out
the war in tigris's cellar, when he announces he's going out
on his own.
to do what? asks cressida.
"i'm not sure exactly. the one thing that i might still be
useful at is causing a diversion. you saw what happened to
that man who looked like me, he says."
what if you...lose control? i say.
"you mean...go mutt? well, if i feel that coming on, i'll
try to get back here, he assures me."
and if snow gets you again? asks gale. "you don't
even have a gun."
i'll just have to take my chances, says peeta. "like
the rest of you." the two exchange a long look, and then
gale reaches into his breast pocket. he places his
nightlock tablet in peeta's hand. peeta lets it lie on his open
palm, neither rejecting nor accepting it. "what about you?"
"don't worry. beetee showed me how to detonate my
explosive arrows by hand. if that fails, i've got my knife. and
i'll have katniss, says gale with a smile. ""she won't give"
them the satisfaction of taking me alive."
the thought of peacekeepers dragging gale away
starts the tune playing in my head again....
are you, are you
coming to the tree
take it, peeta, i say in a strained voice. i reach out
and close his fingers over the pill. "no one will be there to
help you."
we spend a fitful night, woken by one another's
nightmares, minds buzzing with the next day's plans. i'm
relieved when five o'clock rolls around and we can begin
whatever this day holds for us. we eat a mishmash of our
remaining food--canned peaches, crackers, and snails--
leaving one can of salmon for tigris as meager thanks for
all she's done. the gesture seems to touch her in some
way. her face contorts in an odd expression and she flies
into action. she spends the next hour remaking the five of
us. she redresses us so regular clothes hide our uniforms
before we even don our coats and cloaks. covers our
military boots with some sort of furry slippers. secures our
wigs with pins. cleans off the garish remains of the paint
we so hastily applied to our faces and makes us up again.
drapes our outerwear to conceal our weapons. then gives
us handbags and bundles of knickknacks to carry. in the
end, we look exactly like the refugees fleeing the rebels.
never underestimate the power of a brilliant stylist,
says peeta. it's hard to tell, but i think tigris might actually
blush under her stripes.
there are no helpful updates on the television, but the
alley seems as thick with refugees as the previous morning.
our plan is to slip into the crowd in three groups. first
cressida and pollux, who will act as guides while keeping
a safe lead on us. then gale and myself, who intend to
position ourselves among the refugees assigned to the
mansion today. then peeta, who will trail behind us, ready
to create a disturbance as needed.
tigris watches through the shutters for the right
moment, unbolts the door, and nods to cressida and
pollux. "take care," cressida says, and they are gone.
we'll be following in a minute. i get out the key, unlock
peeta's cuffs, and stuff them in my pocket. he rubs his
wrists. flexes them. i feel a kind of desperation rising up in
me. it's like i'm back in the quarter quell, with beetee giving
johanna and me that coil of wire.
listen, i say. "don't do anything foolish."
no. it's last-resort stuff. completely, he says.
i wrap my arms around his neck, feel his arms hesitate
before they embrace me. not as steady as they once were,
but still warm and strong. a thousand moments surge
through me. all the times these arms were my only refuge
from the world. perhaps not fully appreciated then, but so
sweet in my memory, and now gone forever. "all right,
then." i release him.
it's time, says tigris. i kiss her cheek, fasten my red
hooded cloak, pull my scarf up over my nose, and follow
gale out into the frigid air.
sharp, icy snowflakes bite my exposed skin. the rising
sun's trying to break through the gloom without much
success. there's enough light to see the bundled forms
closest to you and little more. perfect conditions, really,
except that i can't locate cressida and pollux. gale and i
drop our heads and shuffle along with the refugees. i can
hear what i missed peeking through the shutters yesterday.
crying, moaning, labored breathing. and, not too far away,
gunfire.
where are we going, uncle? a shivering little boy
asks a man weighed down with a small safe.
"to the president's mansion. they'll assign us a new
place to live, puffs the man."
we turn off the alley and spill out onto one of the main
avenues. "stay to the right!" a voice orders, and i see the
peacekeepers interspersed throughout the crowd,
directing the flow of human traffic. scared faces peer out of
the plate-glass windows of the shops, which are already
becoming overrun with refugees. at this rate, tigris may
have new houseguests by lunch. it was good for everybody
that we got out when we did.
it's brighter now, even with the snow picking up. i catch
sight of cressida and pollux about thirty yards ahead of us,
plodding along with the crowd. i crane my head around to
see if i can locate peeta. i can't, but i've caught the eye of
an inquisitive-looking little girl in a lemon yellow coat. i
nudge gale and slow my pace ever so slightly, to allow a
wall of people to form between us.
we might need to split up, i say under my breath.
there's a girl--
gunfire rips through the crowd, and several people
near me slump to the ground. screams pierce the air as a
second round mows down another group behind us. gale
and i drop to the street, scuttle the ten yards to the shops,
and take cover behind a display of spike-heeled boots
outside a shoe seller's.
a row of feathery footwear blocks gale's view. "who is
it? can you see?" he asks me. what i can see, between
alternating pairs of lavender and mint green leather boots,
is a street full of bodies. the little girl who was watching me
kneels beside a motionless woman, screeching and trying
to rouse her. another wave of bullets slices across the
chest of her yellow coat, staining it with red, knocking the
girl onto her back. for a moment, looking at her tiny
crumpled form, i lose my ability to form words. gale prods
me with his elbow. "katniss?"
they're shooting from the roof above us, i tell gale. i
watch a few more rounds, see the white uniforms dropping
into the snowy streets. "trying to take out the
peacekeepers, but they're not exactly crack shots. it must
be the rebels." i don't feel a rush of joy, although
theoretically my allies have broken through. i am transfixed
by that lemon yellow coat.
if we start shooting, that's it, gale says. "the whole
world will know it's us."
it's true. we're armed only with our fabulous bows. to
release an arrow would be like announcing to both sides
that we're here.
no, i say forcefully. "we've got to get to snow."
"then we better start moving before the whole block
goes up, says gale. hugging the wall, we continue along"
the street. only the wall is mostly shopwindows. a pattern of
sweaty palms and gaping faces presses against the glass.
i yank my scarf up higher over my cheekbones as we dart
between outdoor displays. behind a rack of framed photos
of snow, we encounter a wounded peacekeeper propped
against a strip of brick wall. he asks us for help. gale
knees him in the side of the head and takes his gun. at the
intersection, he shoots a second peacekeeper and we
both have firearms.
so who are we supposed to be now? i ask.
desperate citizens of the capitol, says gale. "the
peacekeepers will think we're on their side, and hopefully
the rebels have more interesting targets."
i'm mulling over the wisdom of this latest role as we
sprint across the intersection, but by the time we reach the
next block, it no longer matters who we are. who anyone is.
because no one is looking at faces. the rebels are here, all
right. pouring onto the avenue, taking cover in doorways,
behind vehicles, guns blazing, hoarse voices shouting
commands as they prepare to meet an army of
peacekeepers marching toward us. caught in the cross
fire are the refugees, unarmed, disoriented, many
wounded.
a pod's activated ahead of us, releasing a gush of
steam that parboils everyone in its path, leaving the victims
intestine-pink and very dead. after that, what little sense of
order there was unravels. as the remaining curlicues of
steam intertwine with the snow, visibility extends just to the
end of my barrel. peacekeeper, rebel, citizen, who knows?
everything that moves is a target. people shoot reflexively,
and i'm no exception. heart pounding, adrenaline burning
through me, everyone is my enemy. except gale. my
hunting partner, the one person who has my back. there's
nothing to do but move forward, killing whoever comes into
our path. screaming people, bleeding people, dead people
everywhere. as we reach the next corner, the entire block
ahead of us lights up with a rich purple glow. we
backpedal, hunker down in a stairwell, and squint into the
light. something's happening to those illuminated by it.
they're assaulted by...what? a sound? a wave? a laser?
weapons fall from their hands, fingers clutch their faces, as
blood sprays from all visible orifices--eyes, noses, mouths,
ears. in less than a minute, everyone's dead and the glow
vanishes. i grit my teeth and run, leaping over the bodies,
feet slipping in the gore. the wind whips the snow into
blinding swirls but doesn't block out the sound of another
wave of boots headed our way.
get down! i hiss at gale. we drop where we are. my
face lands in a still-warm pool of someone's blood, but i
play dead, remain motionless as the boots march over us.
some avoid the bodies. others grind into my hand, my
back, kick my head in passing. as the boots recede, i open
my eyes and nod to gale.
on the next block, we encounter more terrified
refugees, but few soldiers. just when it seems we might
have caught a break, there's a cracking sound, like an egg
hitting the side of a bowl but magnified a thousand times.
we stop, look around for the pod. there's nothing. then i
feel the tips of my boots beginning to tilt ever so slightly.
run! i cry to gale. there's no time to explain, but in a few
seconds the nature of the pod becomes clear to everyone.
a seam has opened up down the center of the block. the
two sides of the tiled street are folding down like flaps,
slowly emptying the people into whatever lies beneath.
i'm torn between making a beeline for the next
intersection and trying to get to the doors that line the street
and break my way into a building. as a result, i end up
moving at a slight diagonal. as the flap continues to drop, i
find my feet scrambling, harder and harder, to find
purchase on the slippery tiles. it's like running along the
side of an icy hill that gets steeper at every step. both of my
destinations--the intersection and the buildings--are a few
feet away when i feel the flap going. there's nothing to do
but use my last seconds of connection to the tiles to push
off for the intersection. as my hands latch on to the side, i
realize the flaps have swung straight down. my feet dangle
in the air, no foothold anywhere. from fifty feet below, a vile
stench hits my nose, like rotted corpses in the summer
heat. black forms crawl around in the shadows, silencing
whoever survives the fall.
a strangled cry comes from my throat. no one is
coming to help me. i'm losing my grip on the icy ledge,
when i see i'm only about six feet from the corner of the pod.
i inch my hands along the ledge, trying to block out the
terrifying sounds from below. when my hands straddle the
corner, i swing my right boot up over the side. it catches on
something and i painstakingly drag myself up to street level.
panting, trembling, i crawl out and wrap my arm around a
lamppost for an anchor, although the ground's perfectly flat.
gale? i call into the abyss, heedless of being
recognized. "gale?"
over here! i look in bewilderment to my left. the flap
held up everything to the very base of the buildings. a
dozen or so people made it that far and now hang from
whatever provides a handhold. doorknobs, knockers, mail
slots. three doors down from me, gale clings to the
decorative iron grating around an apartment door. he could
easily get inside if it was open. but despite repeated kicks
to the door, no one comes to his aid.
cover yourself! i lift my gun. he turns away and i drill
the lock until the door flies inward. gale swings into the
doorway, landing in a heap on the floor. for a moment, i
experience the elation of his rescue. then the white-gloved
hands clamp down on him.
gale meets my eyes, mouths something at me i can't
make out. i don't know what to do. i can't leave him, but i
can't reach him either. his lips move again. i shake my
head to indicate my confusion. at any minute, they'll realize
who they've captured. the peacekeepers are hauling him
inside now. "go!" i hear him yell.
i turn and run away from the pod. all alone now. gale a
prisoner. cressida and pollux could be dead ten times
over. and peeta? i haven't laid eyes on him since we left
tigris's. i hold on to the idea that he may have gone back.
felt an attack coming and retreated to the cellar while he
still had control. realized there was no need for a diversion
when the capitol has provided so many. no need to be bait
and have to take the nightlock--the nightlock! gale doesn't
have any. and as for all that talk of detonating his arrows by
hand, he'll never get the chance. the first thing the
peacekeepers will do is to strip him of his weapons.
i fall into a doorway, tears stinging my eyes. shoot me.
that's what he was mouthing. i was supposed to shoot him!
that was my job. that was our unspoken promise, all of us,
to one another. and i didn't do it and now the capitol will kill
him or torture him or hijack him or--the cracks begin
opening inside me, threatening to break me into pieces. i
have only one hope. that the capitol falls, lays down its
arms, and gives up its prisoners before they hurt gale. but i
can't see that happening while snow's alive.
a pair of peacekeepers runs by, barely glancing at the
whimpering capitol girl huddled in a doorway. i choke down
my tears, wipe the existing ones off my face before they
can freeze, and pull myself back together. okay, i'm still an
anonymous refugee. or did the peacekeepers who caught
gale get a glimpse of me as i fled? i remove my cloak and
turn it inside out, letting the black lining show instead of the
red exterior. arrange the hood so it conceals my face.
grasping my gun close to my chest, i survey the block.
there's only a handful of dazed-looking stragglers. i trail
close behind a pair of old men who take no notice of me.
no one will expect me to be with old men. when we reach
the end of the next intersection, they stop and i almost
bump into them. it's the city circle. across the wide
expanse ringed by grand buildings sits the president's
mansion.
the circle's full of people milling around, wailing, or
just sitting and letting the snow pile up around them. i fit
right in. i begin to weave my way across to the mansion,
tripping over abandoned treasures and snow-frosted limbs.
about halfway there, i become aware of the concrete
barricade. it's about four feet high and extends in a large
rectangle in front of the mansion. you would think it would
be empty, but it's packed with refugees. maybe this is the
group that's been chosen to be sheltered at the mansion?
but as i draw closer, i notice something else. everyone
inside the barricade is a child. toddlers to teenagers.
scared and frostbitten. huddled in groups or rocking
numbly on the ground. they aren't being led into the
mansion. they're penned in, guarded on all sides by
peacekeepers. i know immediately it's not for their
protection. if the capitol wanted to safeguard them, they'd
be down in a bunker somewhere. this is for snow's
protection. the children form his human shield.
there's a commotion and the crowd surges to the left.
i'm caught up by larger bodies, borne sideways, carried off
course. i hear shouts of "the rebels! the rebels!" and know
they must've broken through. the momentum slams me into
a flagpole and i cling to it. using the rope that hangs from
the top, i pull myself up out of the crush of bodies. yes, i can
see the rebel army pouring into the circle, driving the
refugees back onto the avenues. i scan the area for the
pods that will surely be detonating. but that doesn't happen.
this is what happens:
a hovercraft marked with the capitol's seal
materializes directly over the barricaded children. scores
of silver parachutes rain down on them. even in this chaos,
the children know what silver parachutes contain. food.
medicine. gifts. they eagerly scoop them up, frozen fingers
struggling with the strings. the hovercraft vanishes, five
seconds pass, and then about twenty parachutes
simultaneously explode.
a wail rises from the crowd. the snow's red and
littered with undersized body parts. many of the children die
immediately, but others lie in agony on the ground. some
stagger around mutely, staring at the remaining silver
parachutes in their hands, as if they still might have
something precious inside. i can tell the peacekeepers
didn't know this was coming by the way they are yanking
away the barricades, making a path to the children. another
flock of white uniforms sweeps into the opening. but these
aren't peacekeepers. they're medics. rebel medics. i'd
know the uniforms anywhere. they swarm in among the
children, wielding medical kits.
first i get a glimpse of the blond braid down her back.
then, as she yanks off her coat to cover a wailing child, i
notice the duck tail formed by her untucked shirt. i have the
same reaction i did the day effie trinket called her name at
the reaping. at least, i must go limp, because i find myself
at the base of the flagpole, unable to account for the last
few seconds. then i am pushing through the crowd, just as i
did before. trying to shout her name above the roar. i'm
almost there, almost to the barricade, when i think she
hears me. because for just a moment, she catches sight of
me, her lips form my name.
and that's when the rest of the parachutes go off.
25
real or not real? i am on fire. the balls of flame that
erupted from the parachutes shot over the barricades,
through the snowy air, and landed in the crowd. i was just
turning away when one caught me, ran its tongue up the
back of my body, and transformed me into something new.
a creature as unquenchable as the sun.
a fire mutt knows only a single sensation: agony. no
sight, no sound, no feeling except the unrelenting burning of
flesh. perhaps there are periods of unconsciousness, but
what can it matter if i can't find refuge in them? i am cinna's
bird, ignited, flying frantically to escape something
inescapable. the feathers of flame that grow from my body.
beating my wings only fans the blaze. i consume myself, but
to no end.
finally, my wings begin to falter, i lose height, and
gravity pulls me into a foamy sea the color of finnick's
eyes. i float on my back, which continues to burn beneath
the water, but the agony quiets to pain. when i am adrift
and unable to navigate, that's when they come. the dead.
the ones i loved fly as birds in the open sky above me.
soaring, weaving, calling to me to join them. i want so badly
to follow them, but the seawater saturates my wings,
making it impossible to lift them. the ones i hated have
taken to the water, horrible scaled things that tear my salty
flesh with needle teeth. biting again and again. dragging
me beneath the surface.
the small white bird tinged in pink dives down, buries
her claws in my chest, and tries to keep me afloat. "no,
katniss! no! you can't go!"
but the ones i hated are winning, and if she clings to
me, she'll be lost as well. "prim, let go!" and finally she
does.deep in the water, i'm deserted by all. there's only the
sound of my breathing, the enormous effort it takes to draw
the water in, push it out of my lungs. i want to stop, i try to
hold my breath, but the sea forces its way in and out
against my will. "let me die. let me follow the others," i
beg whatever holds me here. there's no response.
trapped for days, years, centuries maybe. dead, but
not allowed to die. alive, but as good as dead. so alone
that anyone, anything no matter how loathsome would be
welcome. but when i finally have a visitor, it's sweet.
morphling. coursing through my veins, easing the pain,
lightening my body so that it rises back toward the air and
rests again on the foam.
foam. i really am floating on foam. i can feel it beneath
the tips of my fingers, cradling parts of my naked body.
there's much pain but there's also something like reality.
the sandpaper of my throat. the smell of burn medicine
from the first arena. the sound of my mother's voice. these
things frighten me, and i try to return to the deep to make
sense of them. but there's no going back. gradually, i'm
forced to accept who i am. a badly burned girl with no
wings. with no fire. and no sister.
in the dazzling white capitol hospital, the doctors work
their magic on me. draping my rawness in new sheets of
skin. coaxing the cells into thinking they are my own.
manipulating my body parts, bending and stretching the
limbs to assure a good fit. i hear over and over again how
lucky i am. my eyes were spared. most of my face was
spared. my lungs are responding to treatment. i will be as
good as new.
when my tender skin has toughened enough to
withstand the pressure of sheets, more visitors arrive. the
morphling opens the door to the dead and alive alike.
haymitch, yellow and unsmiling. cinna, stitching a new
wedding dress. delly, prattling on about the niceness of
people. my father sings all four stanzas of "the hanging
tree" and reminds me that my mother--who sleeps in a
chair between shifts--isn't to know about it.
one day i awake to expectations and know i will not be
allowed to live in my dreamland. i must take food by mouth.
move my own muscles. make my way to the bathroom. a
brief appearance by president coin clinches it.
don't worry, she says. "i've saved him for you."
the doctors' puzzlement grows over why i'm unable to
speak. many tests are done, and while there's damage to
my vocal cords, it doesn't account for it. finally, dr.
aurelius, a head doctor, comes up with the theory that i've
become a mental, rather than physical, avox. that my
silence has been brought on by emotional trauma. although
he's presented with a hundred proposed remedies, he tells
them to leave me alone. so i don't ask about anyone or
anything, but people bring me a steady stream of
information. on the war: the capitol fell the day the
parachutes went off, president coin leads panem now, and
troops have been sent out to put down the small remaining
pockets of capitol resistance. on president snow: he's
being held prisoner, awaiting trial and most certain
execution. on my assassination team: cressida and pollux
have been sent out into the districts to cover the wreckage
of the war. gale, who took two bullets in an escape attempt,
is mopping up peacekeepers in 2. peeta's still in the burn
unit. he made it to the city circle after all. on my family: my
mother buries her grief in her work.
having no work, grief buries me. all that keeps me
going is coin's promise. that i can kill snow. and when
that's done, nothing will be left.
eventually, i'm released from the hospital and given a
room in the president's mansion to share with my mother.
she's almost never there, taking her meals and sleeping at
work. it falls to haymitch to check on me, make sure i'm
eating and using my medicines. it's not an easy job. i take
to my old habits from district 13. wandering unauthorized
through the mansion. into bedrooms and offices, ballrooms
and baths. seeking strange little hiding spaces. a closet of
furs. a cabinet in the library. a long-forgotten bathtub in a
room of discarded furniture. my places are dim and quiet
and impossible to find. i curl up, make myself smaller, try to
disappear entirely. wrapped in silence, i slide my bracelet
that reads mentally disoriented around and around my
wrist.
my name is katniss everdeen. i am seventeen years
old. my home is district 12. there is no district 12. i am
the mockingjay. i brought down the capitol. president
snow hates me. he killed my sister. now i will kill him.
and then the hunger games will be over....
periodically, i find myself back in my room, unsure
whether i was driven by a need for morphling or if haymitch
ferreted me out. i eat the food, take the medicine, and am
required to bathe. it's not the water i mind, but the mirror
that reflects my naked fire-mutt body. the skin grafts still
retain a newborn-baby pinkness. the skin deemed
damaged but salvageable looks red, hot, and melted in
places. patches of my former self gleam white and pale. i'm
like a bizarre patchwork quilt of skin. parts of my hair were
singed off completely; the rest has been chopped off at odd
lengths. katniss everdeen, the girl who was on fire. i
wouldn't much care except the sight of my body brings back
the memory of the pain. and why i was in pain. and what
happened just before the pain started. and how i watched
my little sister become a human torch.
closing my eyes doesn't help. fire burns brighter in
the darkness.
dr. aurelius shows up sometimes. i like him because
he doesn't say stupid things like how i'm totally safe, or that
he knows i can't see it but i'll be happy again one day, or
even that things will be better in panem now. he just asks if
i feel like talking, and when i don't answer, he falls asleep in
his chair. in fact, i think his visits are largely motivated by his
need for a nap. the arrangement works for both of us.
the time draws near, although i could not give you
exact hours and minutes. president snow has been tried
and found guilty, sentenced to execution. haymitch tells me,
i hear talk of it as i drift past the guards in the hallways. my
mockingjay suit arrives in my room. also my bow, looking
no worse for wear, but no sheath of arrows. either because
they were damaged or more likely because i shouldn't have
weapons. i vaguely wonder if i should be preparing for the
event in some way, but nothing comes to mind.
late one afternoon, after a long period in a cushioned
window seat behind a painted screen, i emerge and turn
left instead of right. i find myself in a strange part of the
mansion, and immediately lose my bearings. unlike the
area where i'm quartered, there seems to be no one around
to ask. i like it, though. wish i'd found it sooner. it's so quiet,
with the thick carpets and heavy tapestries soaking up the
sound. softly lit. muted colors. peaceful. until i smell the
roses. i dive behind some curtains, shaking too hard to run,
while i await the mutts. finally, i realize there are no mutts
coming. so, what do i smell? real roses? could it be that i
am near the garden where the evil things grow?
as i creep down the hall, the odor becomes
overpowering. perhaps not as strong as the actual mutts,
but purer, because it's not competing with sewage and
explosives. i turn a corner and find myself staring at two
surprised guards. not peacekeepers, of course. there are
no more peacekeepers. but not the trim, gray-uniformed
soldiers from 13 either. these two, a man and a woman,
wear the tattered, thrown-together clothes of actual rebels.
still bandaged and gaunt, they are now keeping watch over
the doorway to the roses. when i move to enter, their guns
form an x in front of me.
you can't go in, miss, says the man.
soldier, the woman corrects him. "you can't go in,
soldier everdeen. president's orders."
i just stand there patiently waiting for them to lower
their guns, for them to understand, without my telling them,
that behind those doors is something i need. just a rose. a
single bloom. to place in snow's lapel before i shoot him.
my presence seems to worry the guards. they're
discussing calling haymitch, when a woman speaks up
behind me. "let her go in."
i know the voice but can't immediately place it. not
seam, not 13, definitely not capitol. i turn my head and find
myself face-to-face with paylor, the commander from 8.
she looks even more beat up than she did at the hospital,
but who doesn't?
on my authority, says paylor. "she has a right to
anything behind that door." these are her soldiers, not
coin's. they drop their weapons without question and let
me pass.
at the end of a short hallway, i push apart the glass
doors and step inside. by now the smell's so strong that it
begins to flatten out, as if there's no more my nose can
absorb. the damp, mild air feels good on my hot skin. and
the roses are glorious. row after row of sumptuous blooms,
in lush pink, sunset orange, and even pale blue. i wander
through the aisles of carefully pruned plants, looking but not
touching, because i have learned the hard way how deadly
these beauties can be. i know when i find it, crowning the
top of a slender bush. a magnificent white bud just
beginning to open. i pull my left sleeve over my hand so that
my skin won't actually have to touch it, take up a pair of
pruning shears, and have just positioned them on the stem
when he speaks.
that's a nice one.
my hand jerks, the shears snap shut, severing the
stem.
"the colors are lovely, of course, but nothing says
perfection like white."
i still can't see him, but his voice seems to rise up from
an adjacent bed of red roses. delicately pinching the stem
of the bud through the fabric of my sleeve, i move slowly
around the corner and find him sitting on a stool against the
wall. he's as well groomed and finely dressed as ever, but
weighted down with manacles, ankle shackles, tracking
devices. in the bright light, his skin's a pale, sickly green.
he holds a white handkerchief spotted with fresh blood.
even in his deteriorated state, his snake eyes shine bright
and cold. "i was hoping you'd find your way to my quarters."
his quarters. i have trespassed into his home, the way
he slithered into mine last year, hissing threats with his
bloody, rosy breath. this greenhouse is one of his rooms,
perhaps his favorite; perhaps in better times he tended the
plants himself. but now it's part of his prison. that's why the
guards halted me. and that's why paylor let me in.
i'd supposed he would be secured in the deepest
dungeon that the capitol had to offer, not cradled in the lap
of luxury. yet coin left him here. to set a precedent, i
guess. so that if in the future she ever fell from grace, it
would be understood that presidents--even the most
despicable--get special treatment. who knows, after all,
when her own power might fade?
"there are so many things we should discuss, but i
have a feeling your visit will be brief. so, first things first."
he begins to cough, and when he removes the
handkerchief from his mouth, it's redder. "i wanted to tell
you how very sorry i am about your sister."
even in my deadened, drugged condition, this sends a
stab of pain through me. reminding me that there are no
limits to his cruelty. and how he will go to his grave trying to
destroy me.
"so wasteful, so unnecessary. anyone could see the
game was over by that point. in fact, i was just about to
issue an official surrender when they released those
parachutes. his eyes are glued on me, unblinking, so as"
not to miss a second of my reaction. but what he's said
makes no sense. when they released the parachutes?
"well, you really didn't think i gave the order, did you?
forget the obvious fact that if i'd had a working hovercraft at
my disposal, i'd have been using it to make an escape. but
that aside, what purpose could it have served? we both
know i'm not above killing children, but i'm not wasteful. i
take life for very specific reasons. and there was no reason
for me to destroy a pen full of capitol children. none at all."
i wonder if the next fit of coughing is staged so that i
can have time to absorb his words. he's lying. of course,
he's lying. but there's something struggling to free itself
from the lie as well.
"however, i must concede it was a masterful move on
coin's part. the idea that i was bombing our own helpless
children instantly snapped whatever frail allegiance my
people still felt to me. there was no real resistance after
that. did you know it aired live? you can see plutarch's
hand there. and in the parachutes. well, it's that sort of
thinking that you look for in a head gamemaker, isn't it?"
snow dabs the corners of his mouth. "i'm sure he wasn't
gunning for your sister, but these things happen."
i'm not with snow now. i'm in special weaponry back
in 13 with gale and beetee. looking at the designs based
on gale's traps. that played on human sympathies. the
first bomb killed the victims. the second, the rescuers.
remembering gale's words.
"beetee and i have been following the same rule
book president snow used when he hijacked peeta."
my failure, says snow, "was being so slow to grasp
coin's plan. to let the capitol and districts destroy one
another, and then step in to take power with thirteen barely
scratched. make no mistake, she was intending to take my
place right from the beginning. i shouldn't be surprised.
after all, it was thirteen that started the rebellion that led to
the dark days, and then abandoned the rest of the districts
when the tide turned against it. but i wasn't watching coin. i
was watching you, mockingjay. and you were watching me.
i'm afraid we have both been played for fools."
i refuse for this to be true. some things even i can't
survive. i utter my first words since my sister's death. "i don't
believe you."
snow shakes his head in mock disappointment. "oh,
my dear miss everdeen. i thought we had agreed not to lie
to each other."
26
out in the hall, i find paylor standing in exactly the
same spot. "did you find what you were looking for?" she
asks.
i hold up the white bud in answer and then stumble
past her. i must have made it back to my room, because
the next thing i know, i'm filling a glass with water from the
bathroom faucet and sticking the rose in it. i sink to my
knees on the cold tile and squint at the flower, as the
whiteness seems hard to focus on in the stark fluorescent
light. my finger catches the inside of my bracelet, twisting it
like a tourniquet, hurting my wrist. i'm hoping the pain will
help me hang on to reality the way it did for peeta. i must
hang on. i must know the truth about what has happened.
there are two possibilities, although the details
associated with them may vary. first, as i've believed, that
the capitol sent in that hovercraft, dropped the parachutes,
and sacrificed its children's lives, knowing the recently
arrived rebels would go to their aid. there's evidence to
support this. the capitol's seal on the hovercraft, the lack of
any attempt to blow the enemy out of the sky, and their long
history of using children as pawns in their battle against the
districts. then there's snow's account. that a capitol
hovercraft manned by rebels bombed the children to bring
a speedy end to the war. but if this was the case, why didn't
the capitol fire on the enemy? did the element of surprise
throw them? had they no defenses left? children are
precious to 13, or so it has always seemed. well, not me,
maybe. once i had outlived my usefulness, i was
expendable. although i think it's been a long time since i've
been considered a child in this war. and why would they do
it knowing their own medics would likely respond and be
taken out by the second blast? they wouldn't. they couldn't.
snow's lying. manipulating me as he always has. hoping to
turn me against the rebels and possibly destroy them. yes.
of course.
then what's nagging at me? those double-exploding
bombs, for one. it's not that the capitol couldn't have the
same weapon, it's just that i'm sure the rebels did. gale and
beetee's brainchild. then there's the fact that snow made
no escape attempt, when i know him to be the consummate
survivor. it seems hard to believe he didn't have a retreat
somewhere, some bunker stocked with provisions where
he could live out the rest of his snaky little life. and finally,
there's his assessment of coin. what's irrefutable is that
she's done exactly what he said. let the capitol and the
districts run one another into the ground and then sauntered
in to take power. even if that was her plan, it doesn't mean
she dropped those parachutes. victory was already in her
grasp. everything was in her grasp.
except me.
i recall boggs's response when i admitted i hadn't put
much thought into snow's successor. "if your immediate
answer isn't coin, then you're a threat. you're the face of
the rebellion. you may have more influence than any
other single person. outwardly, the most you've ever done
is tolerated her."
suddenly, i'm thinking of prim, who was not yet
fourteen, not yet old enough to be granted the title of
soldier, but somehow working on the front lines. how did
such a thing happen? that my sister would have wanted to
be there, i have no doubt. that she would be more capable
than many older than she is a given. but for all that,
someone very high up would have had to approve putting a
thirteen-year-old in combat. did coin do it, hoping that
losing prim would push me completely over the edge? or,
at least, firmly on her side? i wouldn't even have had to
witness it in person. numerous cameras would be covering
the city circle. capturing the moment forever.
no, now i am going crazy, slipping into some state of
paranoia. too many people would know of the mission.
word would get out. or would it? who would have to know
besides coin, plutarch, and a small, loyal or easily
disposable crew?
i badly need help working this out, only everyone i trust
is dead. cinna. boggs. finnick. prim. there's peeta, but
he couldn't do any more than speculate, and who knows
what state his mind's in, anyway. and that leaves only gale.
he's far away, but even if he were beside me, could i
confide in him? what could i say, how could i phrase it,
without implying that it was his bomb that killed prim? the
impossibility of that idea, more than any, is why snow must
be lying.
ultimately, there's only one person to turn to who might
know what happened and might still be on my side. to
broach the subject at all will be a risk. but while i think
haymitch might gamble with my life in the arena, i don't
think he'd rat me out to coin. whatever problems we may
have with each other, we prefer resolving our differences
one-on-one.
i scramble off the tiles, out the door, and across the hall
to his room. when there's no response to my knock, i push
inside. ugh. it's amazing how quickly he can defile a space.
half-eaten plates of food, shattered liquor bottles, and
pieces of broken furniture from a drunken rampage scatter
his quarters. he lies, unkempt and unwashed, in a tangle of
sheets on the bed, passed out.
haymitch, i say, shaking his leg. of course, that's
insufficient. but i give it a few more tries before i dump the
pitcher of water in his face. he comes to with a gasp,
slashing blindly with his knife. apparently, the end of snow's
reign didn't equal the end of his terror.
oh. you, he says. i can tell by his voice that he's still
loaded.
haymitch, i begin.
listen to that. the mockingjay found her voice. he
laughs. "well, plutarch's going to be happy." he takes a
swig from a bottle. "why am i soaking wet?" i lamely drop
the pitcher behind me into a pile of dirty clothes.
i need your help, i say.
haymitch belches, filling the air with white liquor fumes.
what is it, sweetheart? more boy trouble? i don't know
why, but this hurts me in a way haymitch rarely can. it must
show on my face, because even in his drunken state, he
tries to take it back. "okay, not funny." i'm already at the
door. "not funny! come back!" by the thud of his body
hitting the floor, i assume he tried to follow me, but there's
no point.
i zigzag through the mansion and disappear into a
wardrobe full of silken things. i yank them from hangers until
i have a pile and then burrow into it. in the lining of my
pocket, i find a stray morphling tablet and swallow it dry,
heading off my rising hysteria. it's not enough to right things,
though. i hear haymitch calling me in the distance, but he
won't find me in his condition. especially not in this new
spot. swathed in silk, i feel like a caterpillar in a cocoon
awaiting metamorphosis. i always supposed that to be a
peaceful condition. at first it is. but as i journey into night, i
feel more and more trapped, suffocated by the slippery
bindings, unable to emerge until i have transformed into
something of beauty. i squirm, trying to shed my ruined
body and unlock the secret to growing flawless wings.
despite enormous effort, i remain a hideous creature, fired
into my current form by the blast from the bombs.
the encounter with snow opens the door to my old
repertoire of nightmares. it's like being stung by tracker
jackers again. a wave of horrifying images with a brief
respite i confuse with waking--only to find another wave
knocking me back. when the guards finally locate me, i'm
sitting on the floor of the wardrobe, tangled in silk,
screaming my head off. i fight them at first, until they
convince me they're trying to help, peel away the choking
garments, and escort me back to my room. on the way, we
pass a window and i see a gray, snowy dawn spreading
across the capitol.
a very hungover haymitch waits with a handful of pills
and a tray of food that neither of us has the stomach for. he
makes a feeble attempt to get me to talk again but, seeing
it's pointless, sends me to a bath someone has drawn. the
tub's deep, with three steps to the bottom. i ease down into
the warm water and sit, up to my neck in suds, hoping the
medicines kick in soon. my eyes focus on the rose that has
spread its petals overnight, filling the steamy air with its
strong perfume. i rise and reach for a towel to smother it,
when there's a tentative knock and the bathroom door
opens, revealing three familiar faces. they try to smile at
me, but even venia can't conceal her shock at my ravaged
mutt body. "surprise!" octavia squeaks, and then bursts
into tears. i'm puzzling over their reappearance when i
realize that this must be it, the day of the execution. they've
come to prep me for the cameras. remake me to beauty
base zero. no wonder octavia's crying. it's an impossible
task.
they can barely touch my patchwork of skin for fear of
hurting me, so i rinse and dry off myself. i tell them i hardly
notice the pain anymore, but flavius still winces as he
drapes a robe around me. in the bedroom, i find another
surprise. sitting upright in a chair. polished from her
metallic gold wig to her patent leather high heels, gripping a
clipboard. remarkably unchanged except for the vacant
look in her eyes.
effie, i say.
hello, katniss. she stands and kisses me on the
cheek as if nothing has occurred since our last meeting, the
night before the quarter quell. "well, it looks like we've got
another big, big, big day ahead of us. so why don't you
start your prep and i'll just pop over and check on the
arrangements."
okay, i say to her back.
"they say plutarch and haymitch had a hard time
keeping her alive, comments venia under her breath. ""she"
was imprisoned after your escape, so that helps."
it's quite a stretch. effie trinket, rebel. but i don't want
coin killing her, so i make a mental note to present her that
way if asked. "i guess it's good plutarch kidnapped you
three after all."
"we're the only prep team still alive. and all the stylists
from the quarter quell are dead, says venia. she doesn't"
say who specifically killed them. i'm beginning to wonder if
it matters. she gingerly takes one of my scarred hands and
holds it out for inspection. "now, what do you think for the
nails? red or maybe a jet black?"
flavius performs some beauty miracle on my hair,
managing to even out the front while getting some of the
longer locks to hide the bald spots in the back. my face,
since it was spared from the flames, presents no more than
the usual challenges. once i'm in cinna's mockingjay suit,
the only scars visible are on my neck, forearms, and hands.
octavia secures my mockingjay pin over my heart and we
step back to look in the mirror. i can't believe how normal
they've made me look on the outside when inwardly i'm
such a wasteland.
there's a tap at the door and gale steps in. "can i
have a minute?" he asks. in the mirror, i watch my prep
team. unsure of where to go, they bump into one another a
few times and then closet themselves in the bathroom. gale
comes up behind me and we examine each other's
reflection. i'm searching for something to hang on to, some
sign of the girl and boy who met by chance in the woods
five years ago and became inseparable. i'm wondering
what would have happened to them if the hunger games
had not reaped the girl. if she would have fallen in love with
the boy, married him even. and sometime in the future,
when the brothers and sisters had been raised up,
escaped with him into the woods and left 12 behind forever.
would they have been happy, out in the wild, or would the
dark, twisted sadness between them have grown up even
without the capitol's help?
i brought you this. gale holds up a sheath. when i
take it, i notice it holds a single, ordinary arrow. "it's
supposed to be symbolic. you firing the last shot of the
war."
what if i miss? i say. "does coin retrieve it and bring
it back to me? or just shoot snow through the head
herself?"
you won't miss. gale adjusts the sheath on my
shoulder.
we stand there, face-to-face, not meeting each other's
eyes. "you didn't come see me in the hospital." he doesn't
answer, so finally i just say it. "was it your bomb?"
i don't know. neither does beetee, he says. "does it
matter? you'll always be thinking about it."
he waits for me to deny it; i want to deny it, but it's true.
even now i can see the flash that ignites her, feel the heat of
the flames. and i will never be able to separate that
moment from gale. my silence is my answer.
"that was the one thing i had going for me. taking
care of your family, he says. ""shoot straight, okay?"" he"
touches my cheek and leaves. i want to call him back and
tell him that i was wrong. that i'll figure out a way to make
peace with this. to remember the circumstances under
which he created the bomb. take into account my own
inexcusable crimes. dig up the truth about who dropped the
parachutes. prove it wasn't the rebels. forgive him. but
since i can't, i'll just have to deal with the pain.
effie comes in to usher me to some kind of meeting. i
collect my bow and at the last minute remember the rose,
glistening in its glass of water. when i open the door to the
bathroom, i find my prep team sitting in a row on the edge
of the tub, hunched and defeated. i remember i'm not the
only one whose world has been stripped away. "come on,"
i tell them. "we've got an audience waiting."
i'm expecting a production meeting in which plutarch
instructs me where to stand and gives me my cue for
shooting snow. instead, i find myself sent into a room
where six people sit around a table. peeta, johanna,
beetee, haymitch, annie, and enobaria. they all wear the
gray rebel uniforms from 13. no one looks particularly well.
what's this? i say.
we're not sure, haymitch answers. "it appears to be
a gathering of the remaining victors."
we're all that's left? i ask.
the price of celebrity, says beetee. "we were
targeted from both sides. the capitol killed the victors they
suspected of being rebels. the rebels killed those thought
to be allied with the capitol."
johanna scowls at enobaria. "so what's she doing
here?"
"she is protected under what we call the mockingjay
deal, says coin as she enters behind me. ""wherein"
katniss everdeen agreed to support the rebels in
exchange for captured victors' immunity. katniss has
upheld her side of the bargain, and so shall we."
enobaria smiles at johanna. "don't look so smug,"
says johanna. "we'll kill you anyway."
sit down, please, katniss, says coin, closing the
door. i take a seat between annie and beetee, carefully
placing snow's rose on the table. as usual, coin gets right
to the point. "i've asked you here to settle a debate. today
we will execute snow. in the previous weeks, hundreds of
his accomplices in the oppression of panem have been
tried and now await their own deaths. however, the
suffering in the districts has been so extreme that these
measures appear insufficient to the victims. in fact, many
are calling for a complete annihilation of those who held
capitol citizenship. however, in the interest of maintaining
a sustainable population, we cannot afford this."
through the water in the glass, i see a distorted image
of one of peeta's hands. the burn marks. we are both fire
mutts now. my eyes travel up to where the flames licked
across his forehead, singeing away his brows but just
missing his eyes. those same blue eyes that used to meet
mine and then flit away at school. just as they do now.
"so, an alternative has been placed on the table.
since my colleagues and i can come to no consensus, it
has been agreed that we will let the victors decide. a
majority of four will approve the plan. no one may abstain
from the vote, says coin. ""what has been proposed is that"
in lieu of eliminating the entire capitol population, we have
a final, symbolic hunger games, using the children directly
related to those who held the most power."
all seven of us turn to her. "what?" says johanna.
"we hold another hunger games using capitol
children, says coin."
are you joking? asks peeta.
"no. i should also tell you that if we do hold the games,
it will be known it was done with your approval, although the
individual breakdown of your votes will be kept secret for
your own security, coin tells us."
was this plutarch's idea? asks haymitch.
it was mine, says coin. "it seemed to balance the
need for vengeance with the least loss of life. you may cast
your votes."
no! bursts out peeta. "i vote no, of course! we can't
have another hunger games!"
why not? johanna retorts. "it seems very fair to me.
snow even has a granddaughter. i vote yes."
so do i, says enobaria, almost indifferently. "let
them have a taste of their own medicine."
this is why we rebelled! remember? peeta looks at
the rest of us. "annie?"
i vote no with peeta, she says. "so would finnick if
he were here."
but he isn't, because snow's mutts killed him,
johanna reminds her.
no, says beetee. "it would set a bad precedent. we
have to stop viewing one another as enemies. at this point,
unity is essential for our survival. no."
we're down to katniss and haymitch, says coin.
was it like this then? seventy-five years or so ago?
did a group of people sit around and cast their votes on
initiating the hunger games? was there dissent? did
someone make a case for mercy that was beaten down by
the calls for the deaths of the districts' children? the scent
of snow's rose curls up into my nose, down into my throat,
squeezing it tight with despair. all those people i loved,
dead, and we are discussing the next hunger games in an
attempt to avoid wasting life. nothing has changed. nothing
will ever change now.
i weigh my options carefully, think everything through.
keeping my eyes on the rose, i say, "i vote yes...for prim."
haymitch, it's up to you, says coin.
a furious peeta hammers haymitch with the atrocity he
could become party to, but i can feel haymitch watching
me. this is the moment, then. when we find out exactly just
how alike we are, and how much he truly understands me.
i'm with the mockingjay, he says.
excellent. that carries the vote, says coin. "now we
really must take our places for the execution."
as she passes me, i hold up the glass with the rose.
"can you see that snow's wearing this? just over his
heart?"
coin smiles. "of course. and i'll make sure he knows
about the games."
thank you, i say.
people sweep into the room, surround me. the last
touch of powder, the instructions from plutarch as i'm
guided to the front doors of the mansion. the city circle
runs over, spills people down the side streets. the others
take their places outside. guards. officials. rebel leaders.
victors. i hear the cheers that indicate coin has appeared
on the balcony. then effie taps my shoulder, and i step out
into the cold winter sunlight. walk to my position,
accompanied by the deafening roar of the crowd. as
directed, i turn so they see me in profile, and wait. when
they march snow out the door, the audience goes insane.
they secure his hands behind a post, which is
unnecessary. he's not going anywhere. there's nowhere to
go. this is not the roomy stage before the training center
but the narrow terrace in front of the president's mansion.
no wonder no one bothered to have me practice. he's ten
yards away.
i feel the bow purring in my hand. reach back and
grasp the arrow. position it, aim at the rose, but watch his
face. he coughs and a bloody dribble runs down his chin.
his tongue flicks over his puffy lips. i search his eyes for the
slightest sign of anything, fear, remorse, anger. but there's
only the same look of amusement that ended our last
conversation. it's as if he's speaking the words again. "oh,
my dear miss everdeen. i thought we had agreed not to
lie to each other."
he's right. we did.
the point of my arrow shifts upward. i release the
string. and president coin collapses over the side of the
balcony and plunges to the ground. dead.
27
in the stunned reaction that follows, i'm aware of one
sound. snow's laughter. an awful gurgling cackle
accompanied by an eruption of foamy blood when the
coughing begins. i see him bend forward, spewing out his
life, until the guards block him from my sight.
as the gray uniforms begin to converge on me, i think
of what my brief future as the assassin of panem's new
president holds. the interrogation, probable torture, certain
public execution. having, yet again, to say my final
goodbyes to the handful of people who still maintain a hold
on my heart. the prospect of facing my mother, who will
now be entirely alone in the world, decides it.
good night, i whisper to the bow in my hand and feel
it go still. i raise my left arm and twist my neck down to rip
off the pill on my sleeve. instead my teeth sink into flesh. i
yank my head back in confusion to find myself looking into
peeta's eyes, only now they hold my gaze. blood runs from
the teeth marks on the hand he clamped over my nightlock.
let me go! i snarl at him, trying to wrest my arm from his
grasp.
i can't, he says. as they pull me away from him, i feel
the pocket ripped from my sleeve, see the deep violet pill
fall to the ground, watch cinna's last gift get crunched under
a guard's boot. i transform into a wild animal, kicking,
clawing, biting, doing whatever i can to free myself from this
web of hands as the crowd pushes in. the guards lift me up
above the fray, where i continue to thrash as i'm conveyed
over the crush of people. i start screaming for gale. i can't
find him in the throng, but he will know what i want. a good
clean shot to end it all. only there's no arrow, no bullet. is it
possible he can't see me? no. above us, on the giant
screens placed around the city circle, everyone can watch
the whole thing being played out. he sees, he knows, but
he doesn't follow through. just as i didn't when he was
captured. sorry excuses for hunters and friends. both of us.
i'm on my own.
in the mansion, they handcuff and blindfold me. i'm half
dragged, half carried down long passages, up and down
elevators, and deposited on a carpeted floor. the cuffs are
removed and a door slams closed behind me. when i push
the blindfold up, i find i'm in my old room at the training
center. the one where i lived during those last precious
days before my first hunger games and the quarter quell.
the bed's stripped to the mattress, the closet gapes open,
showing the emptiness inside, but i'd know this room
anywhere.
it's a struggle to get to my feet and peel off my
mockingjay suit. i'm badly bruised and might have a broken
finger or two, but it's my skin that's paid most dearly for my
struggle with the guards. the new pink stuff has shredded
like tissue paper and blood seeps through the laboratorygrown
cells. no medics show up, though, and as i'm too far
gone to care, i crawl up onto the mattress, expecting to
bleed to death.
no such luck. by evening, the blood clots, leaving me
stiff and sore and sticky but alive. i limp into the shower and
program in the gentlest cycle i can remember, free of any
soaps and hair products, and squat under the warm spray,
elbows on my knees, head in my hands.
my name is katniss everdeen. why am i not dead? i
should be dead. it would be best for everyone if i were
dead....
when i step out on the mat, the hot air bakes my
damaged skin dry. there's nothing clean to put on. not
even a towel to wrap around me. back in the room, i find
the mockingjay suit has disappeared. in its place is a paper
robe. a meal has been sent up from the mysterious kitchen
with a container of my medications for dessert. i go ahead
and eat the food, take the pills, rub the salve on my skin. i
need to focus now on the manner of my suicide.
i curl back up on the bloodstained mattress, not cold
but feeling so naked with just the paper to cover my tender
flesh. jumping to my death's not an option--the window
glass must be a foot thick. i can make an excellent noose,
but there's nothing to hang myself from. it's possible i could
hoard my pills and then knock myself off with a lethal dose,
except that i'm sure i'm being watched round the clock. for
all i know, i'm on live television at this very moment while
commentators try to analyze what could possibly have
motivated me to kill coin. the surveillance makes almost
any suicide attempt impossible. taking my life is the
capitol's privilege. again.
what i can do is give up. i resolve to lie on the bed
without eating, drinking, or taking my medications. i could
do it, too. just die. if it weren't for the morphling withdrawal.
not bit by bit like in the hospital in 13, but cold turkey. i must
have been on a fairly large dose because when the craving
for it hits, accompanied by tremors, and shooting pains,
and unbearable cold, my resolve's crushed like an eggshell.
i'm on my knees, raking the carpet with my fingernails to
find those precious pills i flung away in a stronger moment. i
revise my suicide plan to slow death by morphling. i will
become a yellow-skinned bag of bones, with enormous
eyes. i'm a couple of days into the plan, making good
progress, when something unexpected happens.
i begin to sing. at the window, in the shower, in my
sleep. hour after hour of ballads, love songs, mountain airs.
all the songs my father taught me before he died, for
certainly there has been very little music in my life since.
what's amazing is how clearly i remember them. the tunes,
the lyrics. my voice, at first rough and breaking on the high
notes, warms up into something splendid. a voice that
would make the mockingjays fall silent and then tumble over
themselves to join in. days pass, weeks. i watch the snows
fall on the ledge outside my window. and in all that time,
mine is the only voice i hear.
what are they doing, anyway? what's the holdup out
there? how difficult can it be to arrange the execution of
one murderous girl? i continue with my own annihilation. my
body's thinner than it's ever been and my battle against
hunger is so fierce that sometimes the animal part of me
gives in to the temptation of buttered bread or roasted
meat. but still, i'm winning. for a few days i feel quite unwell
and think i may finally be traveling out of this life, when i
realize my morphling tablets are shrinking. they are trying
to slowly wean me off the stuff. but why? surely a drugged
mockingjay will be easier to dispose of in front of a crowd.
and then a terrible thought hits me: what if they're not going
to kill me? what if they have more plans for me? a new way
to remake, train, and use me?
i won't do it. if i can't kill myself in this room, i will take
the first opportunity outside of it to finish the job. they can
fatten me up. they can give me a full body polish, dress me
up, and make me beautiful again. they can design dream
weapons that come to life in my hands, but they will never
again brainwash me into the necessity of using them. i no
longer feel any allegiance to these monsters called human
beings, despise being one myself. i think that peeta was
onto something about us destroying one another and letting
some decent species take over. because something is
significantly wrong with a creature that sacrifices its
children's lives to settle its differences. you can spin it any
way you like. snow thought the hunger games were an
efficient means of control. coin thought the parachutes
would expedite the war. but in the end, who does it benefit?
no one. the truth is, it benefits no one to live in a world
where these things happen.
after two days of my lying on my mattress with no
attempt to eat, drink, or even take a morphling tablet, the
door to my room opens. someone crosses around the bed
into my field of vision. haymitch. "your trial's over," he says.
come on. we're going home.
home? what's he talking about? my home's gone.
and even if it were possible to go to this imaginary place, i
am too weak to move. strangers appear. rehydrate and
feed me. bathe and clothe me. one lifts me like a rag doll
and carries me up to the roof, onto a hovercraft, and
fastens me into a seat. haymitch and plutarch sit across
from me. in a few moments, we're airborne.
i've never seen plutarch in such a good mood. he's
positively glowing. "you must have a million questions!"
when i don't respond, he answers them anyway.
after i shot coin, there was pandemonium. when the
ruckus died down, they discovered snow's body, still
tethered to the post. opinions differ on whether he choked
to death while laughing or was crushed by the crowd. no
one really cares. an emergency election was thrown
together and paylor was voted in as president. plutarch
was appointed secretary of communications, which means
he sets the programming for the airwaves. the first big
televised event was my trial, in which he was also a star
witness. in my defense, of course. although most of the
credit for my exoneration must be given to dr. aurelius, who
apparently earned his naps by presenting me as a
hopeless, shell-shocked lunatic. one condition for my
release is that i'll continue under his care, although it will
have to be by phone because he'd never live in a forsaken
place like 12, and i'm confined there until further notice. the
truth is, no one quite knows what to do with me now that the
war's over, although if another one should spring up,
plutarch's sure they could find a role for me. then plutarch
has a good laugh. it never seems to bother him when no
one else appreciates his jokes.
are you preparing for another war, plutarch? i ask.
"oh, not now. now we're in that sweet period where
everyone agrees that our recent horrors should never be
repeated, he says. ""but collective thinking is usually shortlived."
we're fickle, stupid beings with poor memories and a
great gift for self-destruction. although who knows? maybe
this will be it, katniss."
what? i ask.
"the time it sticks. maybe we are witnessing the
evolution of the human race. think about that. and then he"
asks me if i'd like to perform on a new singing program he's
launching in a few weeks. something upbeat would be
good. he'll send the crew to my house.
we land briefly in district 3 to drop off plutarch. he's
meeting with beetee to update the technology on the
broadcast system. his parting words to me are "don't be a
stranger."
when we're back among the clouds, i look at
haymitch. "so why are you going back to twelve?"
"they can't seem to find a place for me in the capitol
either, he says."
at first, i don't question this. but doubts begin to creep
in. haymitch hasn't assassinated anyone. he could go
anywhere. if he's coming back to 12, it's because he's been
ordered to. "you have to look after me, don't you? as my
mentor?" he shrugs. then i realize what it means. "my
mother's not coming back."
no, he says. he pulls an envelope from his jacket
pocket and hands it to me. i examine the delicate, perfectly
formed writing. "she's helping to start up a hospital in
district four. she wants you to call as soon as we get in."
my finger traces the graceful swoop of the letters. "you
know why she can't come back." yes, i know why. because
between my father and prim and the ashes, the place is too
painful to bear. but apparently not for me. "do you want to
know who else won't be there?"
no, i say. "i want to be surprised."
like a good mentor, haymitch makes me eat a
sandwich and then pretends he believes i'm asleep for the
rest of the trip. he busies himself going through every
compartment on the hovercraft, finding the liquor, and
stowing it in his bag. it's night when we land on the green of
the victor's village. half of the houses have lights in the
windows, including haymitch's and mine. not peeta's.
someone has built a fire in my kitchen. i sit in the rocker
before it, clutching my mother's letter.
well, see you tomorrow, says haymitch.
as the clinking of his bag of liquor bottles fades away, i
whisper, "i doubt it."
i am unable to move from the chair. the rest of the
house looms cold and empty and dark. i pull an old shawl
over my body and watch the flames. i guess i sleep,
because the next thing i know, it's morning and greasy
sae's banging around at the stove. she makes me eggs
and toast and sits there until i've eaten it all. we don't talk
much. her little granddaughter, the one who lives in her own
world, takes a bright blue ball of yarn from my mother's
knitting basket. greasy sae tells her to put it back, but i say
she can have it. no one in this house can knit anymore.
after breakfast, greasy sae does the dishes and leaves,
but she comes back up at dinnertime to make me eat
again. i don't know if she's just being neighborly or if she's
on the government's payroll, but she shows up twice every
day. she cooks, i consume. i try to figure out my next move.
there's no obstacle now to taking my life. but i seem to be
waiting for something.
sometimes the phone rings and rings and rings, but i
don't pick it up. haymitch never visits. maybe he changed
his mind and left, although i suspect he's just drunk. no one
comes but greasy sae and her granddaughter. after
months of solitary confinement, they seem like a crowd.
spring's in the air today. you ought to get out, she
says. "go hunting."
i haven't left the house. i haven't even left the kitchen
except to go to the small bathroom a few steps off of it. i'm
in the same clothes i left the capitol in. what i do is sit by
the fire. stare at the unopened letters piling up on the
mantel. "i don't have a bow."
check down the hall, she says.
after she leaves, i consider a trip down the hall. rule it
out. but after several hours, i go anyway, walking in silent
sock feet, so as not to awaken the ghosts. in the study,
where i had my tea with president snow, i find a box with
my father's hunting jacket, our plant book, my parents'
wedding photo, the spile haymitch sent in, and the locket
peeta gave me in the clock arena. the two bows and a
sheath of arrows gale rescued on the night of the
firebombing lie on the desk. i put on the hunting jacket and
leave the rest of the stuff untouched. i fall asleep on the sofa
in the formal living room. a terrible nightmare follows, where
i'm lying at the bottom of a deep grave, and every dead
person i know by name comes by and throws a shovel full of
ashes on me. it's quite a long dream, considering the list of
people, and the deeper i'm buried, the harder it is to
breathe. i try to call out, begging them to stop, but the ashes
fill my mouth and nose and i can't make any sound. still the
shovel scrapes on and on and on....
i wake with a start. pale morning light comes around
the edges of the shutters. the scraping of the shovel
continues. still half in the nightmare, i run down the hall, out
the front door, and around the side of the house, because
now i'm pretty sure i can scream at the dead. when i see
him, i pull up short. his face is flushed from digging up the
ground under the windows. in a wheelbarrow are five
scraggly bushes.
you're back, i say.
"dr. aurelius wouldn't let me leave the capitol until
yesterday, peeta says. ""by the way, he said to tell you he"
can't keep pretending he's treating you forever. you have to
pick up the phone."
he looks well. thin and covered with burn scars like
me, but his eyes have lost that clouded, tortured look. he's
frowning slightly, though, as he takes me in. i make a
halfhearted effort to push my hair out of my eyes and realize
it's matted into clumps. i feel defensive. "what are you
doing?"
"i went to the woods this morning and dug these up.
for her, he says. ""i thought we could plant them along the"
side of the house."
i look at the bushes, the clods of dirt hanging from their
roots, and catch my breath as the word rose registers. i'm
about to yell vicious things at peeta when the full name
comes to me. not plain rose but evening primrose. the
flower my sister was named for. i give peeta a nod of
assent and hurry back into the house, locking the door
behind me. but the evil thing is inside, not out. trembling
with weakness and anxiety, i run up the stairs. my foot
catches on the last step and i crash onto the floor. i force
myself to rise and enter my room. the smell's very faint but
still laces the air. it's there. the white rose among the dried
flowers in the vase. shriveled and fragile, but holding on to
that unnatural perfection cultivated in snow's greenhouse. i
grab the vase, stumble down to the kitchen, and throw its
contents into the embers. as the flowers flare up, a burst of
blue flame envelops the rose and devours it. fire beats
roses again. i smash the vase on the floor for good
measure.
back upstairs, i throw open the bedroom windows to
clear out the rest of snow's stench. but it still lingers, on my
clothes and in my pores. i strip, and flakes of skin the size
of playing cards cling to the garments. avoiding the mirror, i
step into the shower and scrub the roses from my hair, my
body, my mouth. bright pink and tingling, i find something
clean to wear. it takes half an hour to comb out my hair.
greasy sae unlocks the front door. while she makes
breakfast, i feed the clothes i had shed to the fire. at her
suggestion, i pare off my nails with a knife.
over the eggs, i ask her, "where did gale go?"
"district two. got some fancy job there. i see him now
and again on the television, she says."
i dig around inside myself, trying to register anger,
hatred, longing. i find only relief.
i'm going hunting today, i say.
well, i wouldn't mind some fresh game at that, she
answers.
i arm myself with a bow and arrows and head out,
intending to exit 12 through the meadow. near the square
are teams of masked and gloved people with horse-drawn
carts. sifting through what lay under the snow this winter.
gathering remains. a cart's parked in front of the mayor's
house. i recognize thom, gale's old crewmate, pausing a
moment to wipe the sweat from his face with a rag. i
remember seeing him in 13, but he must have come back.
his greeting gives me the courage to ask, "did they find
anyone in there?"
"whole family. and the two people who worked for
them, thom tells me."
madge. quiet and kind and brave. the girl who gave
me the pin that gave me a name. i swallow hard. wonder if
she'll be joining the cast of my nightmares tonight.
shoveling the ashes into my mouth. "i thought maybe, since
he was the mayor..."
"i don't think being the mayor of twelve put the odds in
his favor, says thom."
i nod and keep moving, careful not to look in the back
of the cart. all through the town and the seam, it's the
same. the reaping of the dead. as i near the ruins of my
old house, the road becomes thick with carts. the
meadow's gone, or at least dramatically altered. a deep pit
has been dug, and they're lining it with bones, a mass
grave for my people. i skirt around the hole and enter the
woods at my usual place. it doesn't matter, though. the
fence isn't charged anymore and has been propped up with
long branches to keep out the predators. but old habits die
hard. i think about going to the lake, but i'm so weak that i
barely make it to my meeting place with gale. i sit on the
rock where cressida filmed us, but it's too wide without his
body beside me. several times i close my eyes and count
to ten, thinking that when i open them, he will have
materialized without a sound as he so often did. i have to
remind myself that gale's in 2 with a fancy job, probably
kissing another pair of lips.
it is the old katniss's favorite kind of day. early spring.
the woods awakening after the long winter. but the spurt of
energy that began with the primroses fades away. by the
time i make it back to the fence, i'm so sick and dizzy,
thom has to give me a ride home in the dead people's
cart. help me to the sofa in the living room, where i watch
the dust motes spin in the thin shafts of afternoon light.
my head snaps around at the hiss, but it takes awhile
to believe he's real. how could he have gotten here? i take
in the claw marks from some wild animal, the back paw he
holds slightly above the ground, the prominent bones in his
face. he's come on foot, then, all the way from 13. maybe
they kicked him out or maybe he just couldn't stand it there
without her, so he came looking.
it was the waste of a trip. she's not here, i tell him.
buttercup hisses again. "she's not here. you can hiss all
you like. you won't find prim." at her name, he perks up.
raises his flattened ears. begins to meow hopefully. "get
out!" he dodges the pillow i throw at him. "go away!
there's nothing left for you here!" i start to shake, furious
with him. "she's not coming back! she's never ever coming
back here again!" i grab another pillow and get to my feet
to improve my aim. out of nowhere, the tears begin to pour
down my cheeks. "she's dead." i clutch my middle to dull
the pain. sink down on my heels, rocking the pillow, crying.
she's dead, you stupid cat. she's dead. a new sound,
part crying, part singing, comes out of my body, giving
voice to my despair. buttercup begins to wail as well. no
matter what i do, he won't go. he circles me, just out of
reach, as wave after wave of sobs racks my body, until
eventually i fall unconscious. but he must understand. he
must know that the unthinkable has happened and to
survive will require previously unthinkable acts. because
hours later, when i come to in my bed, he's there in the
moonlight. crouched beside me, yellow eyes alert,
guarding me from the night.
in the morning, he sits stoically as i clean the cuts, but
digging the thorn from his paw brings on a round of those
kitten mews. we both end up crying again, only this time we
comfort each other. on the strength of this, i open the letter
haymitch gave me from my mother, dial the phone number,
and weep with her as well. peeta, bearing a warm loaf of
bread, shows up with greasy sae. she makes us breakfast
and i feed all my bacon to buttercup.
slowly, with many lost days, i come back to life. i try to
follow dr. aurelius's advice, just going through the motions,
amazed when one finally has meaning again. i tell him my
idea about the book, and a large box of parchment sheets
arrives on the next train from the capitol.
i got the idea from our family's plant book. the place
where we recorded those things you cannot trust to
memory. the page begins with the person's picture. a
photo if we can find it. if not, a sketch or painting by peeta.
then, in my most careful handwriting, come all the details it
would be a crime to forget. lady licking prim's cheek. my
father's laugh. peeta's father with the cookies. the color of
finnick's eyes. what cinna could do with a length of silk.
boggs reprogramming the holo. rue poised on her toes,
arms slightly extended, like a bird about to take flight. on
and on. we seal the pages with salt water and promises to
live well to make their deaths count. haymitch finally joins
us, contributing twenty-three years of tributes he was forced
to mentor. additions become smaller. an old memory that
surfaces. a late primrose preserved between the pages.
strange bits of happiness, like the photo of finnick and
annie's newborn son.
we learn to keep busy again. peeta bakes. i hunt.
haymitch drinks until the liquor runs out, and then raises
geese until the next train arrives. fortunately, the geese can
take pretty good care of themselves. we're not alone. a
few hundred others return because, whatever has
happened, this is our home. with the mines closed, they
plow the ashes into the earth and plant food. machines from
the capitol break ground for a new factory where we will
make medicines. although no one seeds it, the meadow
turns green again.
peeta and i grow back together. there are still
moments when he clutches the back of a chair and hangs
on until the flashbacks are over. i wake screaming from
nightmares of mutts and lost children. but his arms are
there to comfort me. and eventually his lips. on the night i
feel that thing again, the hunger that overtook me on the
beach, i know this would have happened anyway. that what
i need to survive is not gale's fire, kindled with rage and
hatred. i have plenty of fire myself. what i need is the
dandelion in the spring. the bright yellow that means rebirth
instead of destruction. the promise that life can go on, no
matter how bad our losses. that it can be good again. and
only peeta can give me that.
so after, when he whispers, "you love me. real or not
real?"
i tell him, "real."
epilogue
they play in the meadow. the dancing girl with the
dark hair and blue eyes. the boy with blond curls and gray
eyes, struggling to keep up with her on his chubby toddler
legs. it took five, ten, fifteen years for me to agree. but
peeta wanted them so badly. when i first felt her stirring
inside of me, i was consumed with a terror that felt as old
as life itself. only the joy of holding her in my arms could
tame it. carrying him was a little easier, but not much.
the questions are just beginning. the arenas have
been completely destroyed, the memorials built, there are
no more hunger games. but they teach about them at
school, and the girl knows we played a role in them. the
boy will know in a few years. how can i tell them about that
world without frightening them to death? my children, who
take the words of the song for granted:
deep in the meadow, under the willow
a bed of grass, a soft green pillow
lay down your head, and close your sleepy
eyes
and when again they open, the sun will rise.
here it's safe, here it's warm
here the daisies guard you from every harm
here your dreams are sweet and tomorrow
brings them true
here is the place where i love you.
my children, who don't know they play on a graveyard.
peeta says it will be okay. we have each other. and
the book. we can make them understand in a way that will
make them braver. but one day i'll have to explain about my
nightmares. why they came. why they won't ever really go
away.
i'll tell them how i survive it. i'll tell them that on bad
mornings, it feels impossible to take pleasure in anything
because i'm afraid it could be taken away. that's when i
make a list in my head of every act of goodness i've seen
someone do. it's like a game. repetitive. even a little
tedious after more than twenty years.
but there are much worse games to play.
the end
acknowledgments
i would like to pay tribute to the following people who
gave their time, talent, and support to the hunger games.
first off, i must thank my extraordinary triumvirate of
editors. kate egan, whose insight, humor, and intelligence
have guided me through eight novels; jen rees, whose
clear vision catches the things the rest of us miss; and
david levithan, who moves so effortlessly through his
multiple roles of note giver, title master, and editorial
director.
through rough drafts, food poisoning, every up and
down, you are there with me, rosemary stimola, equal
parts gifted creative advisor and professional guardian, my
literary agent and my friend. and jason dravis, my longtime
entertainment agent, i feel so lucky to have you watching
over me as we head for the screen.
thanks to designer elizabeth b. parisi and artist tim
o'brien for the beautiful book jackets that so successfully
captured both the mockingjays and people's attention.
all hail the incredible team at scholastic for getting
the hunger games out into the world: sheila marie everett,
tracy van straaten, rachel coun, leslie garych, adrienne
vrettos, nick martin, jacky harper, lizette serrano,
kathleen donohoe, john mason, stephanie nooney, karyn
browne, joy simpkins, jess white, dick robinson, ellie
berger, suzanne murphy, andrea davis pinkney, the entire
scholastic sales force, and the many others who have
devoted so much energy, smarts, and savvy to this series.
to the five writer-friends i rely on most heavily, richard
register, mary beth bass, christopher santos, peter
bakalian, and james proimos, much gratitude for your
advice, perspective, and laughter.
special love to my late father, michael collins, who laid
the groundwork for this series with his deep commitment to
educating his children on war and peace, and my mother,
jane collins, who introduced me to the greeks, sci-fi, and
fashion (although that last one didn't stick); my sisters,
kathy and joanie; my brother, drew; my in-laws, dixie and
charles pryor; and the many members of my extended
family whose enthusiasm and support have kept me going.
and finally, i turn to my husband, cap pryor, who read
the hunger games in its earliest draft, insisted on
answers to questions i hadn't even imagined, and remained
my sounding board through the entire series. thanks to him
and my wonderful kids, charlie and isabel, for their daily
love, their patience, and the joy they bring me.



about the author
suzanne collins is the author of the bestselling
underland chronicles series, which started with gregor the
overlander. her groundbreaking young adult novels, the
hunger games and catching fire, were both new york
times bestsellers, received wide praise, and garnered
numerous starred reviews. suzanne lives with her family in
connecticut. you can find her online at
www.suzannecollinsbooks.com.
